I'll tear up if I talk about it because
things were going well in my life and
then one day just
rack everything came crashing
down and
um and I've learned that friendship is
super powerful I had people descending
on my home to be with me you know one
day I just like look up and Lex is in
the room and they sat with me picked me
up and they reminded me who I am and um
you know I have just such immense
gratitude for
that Dr Andrew huberman is a
world-renowned neuroscientist Stanford
professor and podcaster revolutionizing
how we understand the brain and how we
can adopt change break bad habits and
Achieve Peak Performance growing up I
was scared depressed and Confused my
parents split up I was getting in
multiple fights found myself locked up
in this residential treatment program
and I realized that I need to take
control of my life I'm so intrigued by
that because so many people feel stuck
in their lives so how does someone even
make those life-changing decisions well
there are so many zeroc cost tools that
can change your brain we can go through
all of them so I want to talk about
dopamine in this graph the dopamine is
kind of like a wave pool in every domain
of life whether or not it's food
exercise for some people it's work or
sex if you push things to the max you're
going to feel depleted and UND
stimulated afterwards and you need so
much more energy to get the same output
and when you're in that dopamine
depleted State typically what people do
is they try and access things that are
going to reactivate the dopamine
circuitry and all it does is drive them
further and further into that trough so
how do you fix that so it's hard to exit
but start
with this is a sentence I never thought
I'd say in my life um we've just hit 7
million subscribers on YouTube and I
want to say a huge thank you to all of
you that show up here every Monday and
Thursday to watch our conversations um
from the bottom of my heart but also on
behalf of my team who you don't always
get to meet there's almost 50 people now
behind the dire of a CEO that work to
put this together so from all of us
thank you so much um we did a raffle
last month and we gave away prizes for
people that subscribed to the show up
until 7 million subscribers and you guys
love that raffle so much that we're
going to continue it so every single
month we're giving away money can't buy
prizes including meetings with me
invites to our events and ,000 gift
vouchers to anyone that subscribes to
the Dy there's now more than 7 million
of you so if you make the decision to
subscribe today you can be one of those
lucky people thank you from the bottom
of my heart let's get to the
[Music]
conversation Andrew at the very heart of
what you do at the very very heart if I
if I looked at all that you've produced
and I had to encapsulate it into just
one or two sentences that encapsulates
your mission statement what would that
be I want to share the beauty and
utility of biology
I want people to understand how
incredible the human body and brain are
and how even a small understanding of
the underlying mechanisms about how we
interact with light or temperature
exercise thoughts emotions Etc how that
can impact our health in really powerful
ways you have become a cultural
phenomenon because of the information
that you've
shared in your view why and how has that
happened I guess maybe most importantly
why has that happened what is it that
you've kind of catered to that was
absent in people's understanding of
themselves well I think people are
intensely curious about themselves
meaning our species why we feel the way
we feel why other people feel and act
the way they do and I think most
everybody I like to think is deeply
interested in how to be the best version
of themselves and I think what I've done
is I've provided a lens into all of that
that through
biology through Neuroscience in
particular but also I'm a practitioner
so since I was pretty young I've been
actively involved in sports and
psychology and interested in what one
can do in some cases take things to
avoid in order to be the best version of
oneself and so um I'm an academic right
I have a laboratory and I'm a tenured
faculty member at Stanford although I
should mention that I've shrunk my
laboratory considerably in the last year
or so but you I've done experiments on
animal models on humans and human
clinical trials so I have the
understanding and expertise of a of a
research scientist and at the same time
I think very deeply about how to
translate the information in these
peer-reviewed papers how to translate
the information in the fields of science
and medicine into actionable what we
call protocols and and I do my best to
um distill things down into uh you know
actionable things um but I'm not a big
believer in dumbing things down I
decided to go the opposite way rather
than give little Snippets um 90c videos
we include those but rather I decided to
go for full one to three hour maybe even
four hour lectures on a topic because I
believe and I'm not the first to say it
that people have um near infinite
ability to learn if they are told things
in a way that's clear so believe that
people want to understand they can
understand and it doesn't require
decorating things in a lot of
complicated language sometimes we need
to include some complicated language
just because that's the way science and
medicine are and that people are willing
to learn that and carry that along and
once they understand how they work a
little bit better you arm them with a
little bit of knowledge then really
they're just Off to the Races and the
the rest takes care of itself I may a
couple of times today just ask you to
explain something to me in more simpler
terms because I don't have any
fundamental understanding of of science
so um much of my objective is just to if
if is just to be completely honest if I
don't understand something because I'm
sure there's a lot of people listening
that also probably don't understand
something one of the things that was
most surprising to me about you was your
background and I think the interesting
thing about your background and where
you came from and the the struggles you
faced
and in contrast to the man that sits in
front of me today is it I think it
speaks to one of the
fundamental points of curiosity that I
have about your work which is it's all
well and good knowing
protocols but there's something else
required to be able to pursue them now
people say that this is discipline or
motivation or whatever it might be but
when I looked at your background and
where you've come from it wasn't a
straight line there's no there's an
element of transformation that's gone on
there there's there's
almost the early Andrew huberman who I
never would have guessed would have been
the man that is is almost unrecognizable
from the man sat in front of me today
and then there's the man sat in front of
me today and the reason I'm so
fascinated by that is because if I can
understand how you went from that hat
and hubman to this one it gives me it
liberates me from the excuses that I
won't be able to pursue your protocols
now yeah well certainly uh there's been
a lot of Adventure and transformation
certainly some hardship listen I I'll be
the first to say you know my life has
been easier than it has been for others
and harder than it has been for others
right so I'm not trying to plant a flag
as having had the hardest or the easiest
life I only know um what's my experience
right so all I've got is my experience
my knowledge and my words uh to convey
that but yeah it was not a linear path I
would say the kind of key Milestones
along the way and the the the relevant
pieces are for as long as I can remember
I've always had an intense curiosity and
an intense desire for adventure
um so I want to learn and I want to
learn firsthand I also suppose I've
always had an intensity like I I've um
been told since I was a young kid you
know I I sort of like forward leaning a
little bit uh you know forward Center of
mass so to speak um but yeah my
childhood on the one hand was very
conventional and and very sweet in the
sense that you know I had two parents my
dad's actually a scientist he's a
theoretical physicist by training he's
Argentine uh but then did his graduate
training in the United States my
mother's uh a writer and she was a
teacher she didn't work a whole lot when
we were kids she was mostly focused on
raising us and my childhood to my memory
was marked by you know dinners together
at the table I was very very interested
in all things biology in particular fish
so all things Aquaria Birds anything you
know tropical birds I I would learn all
about them learn about fish I would then
lecture about these things in class on
Monday as a way to try the teachers to
try and get me to not talk to students
around me because I'd be telling them
about it otherwise so I've been giving
little lectures since I was a kid and
and then I suppose as I matured um so to
speak um you know around adolescence my
parents split up it was a very high
conflict divorce um and that sent me uh
in the direction of more kind of a
Wilder foraging let's call it that I was
a bit feral um just the the circumstance
led to situation where I was seeking out
Sports and friends for which there
wasn't any parental involvement so for
me me the immediate attraction was to
skateboarding and punk rock culture and
so I was very fortunate that I was drawn
into skateboarding and punkrock culture
in the ear late 80s early 90s I'm 49 now
or almost 49 and at that time that was a
very nent culture there was no X Games
there were no major sponsors that sort
of thing and so there were all these not
parentless but rather feral kids some
were parentless and I got to be exposed
to some incredible skateboarding and I
was not a particularly good skateboarder
but certainly had the drive to try and
do it I kept hurting myself so that was
actually an important event I kept you
know hurting my body trying to push
myself to get really good friends of
mine were getting sponsored close friend
of mine got picked up as a pro while we
were in high school we were traveling
going to contest what you probably may
have noticed is there wasn't a lot of
attending school so I don't recommend
this to young people stay in school at
least at the early stage get that basic
education while your brain is still
hyper plastic but you know I was exposed
to and fortunately did not partake in a
lot of drugs and violence but I saw that
I also saw a lot of incredible
skateboarding some of these people went
on to um start huge companies and do
incredible things in the realm of action
sports so like DC um I know the guys
that started that Danny Way call McKay
you know like I knew at that time um I
knew of I wasn't close with but you know
Tony Hawk watched his Ascent right he
was a few years ahead of me um but I
would attend contest skate and contest
so I was in this world where it was all
DIY it was all self-created now at some
point I got a girlfriend and um got into
other things um and kind of left
skateboarding um thought I might be a
firefighter for a little while I was
always very physical what age is this um
so I was 16 when I got my first
girlfriend and
um I wasn't doing well in skateboarding
I kept breaking my foot um people were
moving on without me that was just the
nature of it I was in love with her
wanted to spend time with her and so I
thought well I'm not really doing well
in school I'm not really attending
school and I'll need to work and take
care of us you know I was really
thinking kind of like an adult at that
point terms of what I would do and so I
thought I'd get into the fire service so
I started trying to strengthen my body I
started doing resistance training keep
in mind back then the only people that
lifted weights were you know preseason
American football players people going
to the military and bodybuilders and I
wasn't interested in any of those three
things but I started doing resist
resistance training um and realiz
realized wow like this is a really
powerful tool I can make my body
stronger through work I could I couldn't
do a single pull-up when I started I was
always pretty skinny I you know shot up
uh a full foot in height but was very
very skinny you know at that point and
um within you know a summer I could do
pull-ups I could do these things I
thought wow like there's this remarkable
relationship between doing physical
effort and kind of ability or outcome
and then I also started running a lot
for whatever reason I ran cross country
my senior year of high school school and
also there I felt like there was a
direct relationship between effort and
outcome if I ran further then the next
time I could run even further if my
lungs burned on a hill run well then the
next time I could do that hill without
my lungs burning whereas in
skateboarding no matter how hard I seem
to try I just couldn't match the level
of effort with the outcome so it was
from that point forward that you know 16
years old forward that I made running
and resistance training just part of my
regular weekly schedule um what ended up
happening was she went off to
college I ended up just basically living
in my car or her dorm room while she was
off at college she was a year ahead of
me and I realized I wanted to be near
her so I eventually I applied to college
and somehow got in by the end of my
freshman year I had been getting in
multiple fights so I still had that kind
of wildness from the world I was
previously in I was getting into
physical altercations I was never into
drugs or alcohol that was for forunate I
don't have a propensity to be addicted
to those things but my life really
wasn't in order and it was really it was
actually nearly 30 years ago to the day
it was July 4th 1994 I went to a
barbecue I got into an altercation with
a bunch of people that were robbing the
house that we were at um and and by the
way there's sort of a little tangent
Side Story one of my um friends in
college we weren't super close but my
girlfriend at the time had lived with
the now wife of Jack Johnson the
musician so Jack recalls that party we
have other friends from that party that
was kind of a a meaningful day for me
because I got into this altercation
everything turned out okay um in the
sense that you know we got our
belongings back no one was badly hurt
but I remember going back to the place
where I was staying at that time and
thinking to myself okay this is bad
right um you know like 19 years old or I
guess it was just shy of of of 18 I am
not doing well in school my freshman
year was a disaster where I went to
college I don't think I flunked out but
it it just wasn't really attending class
I wasn't doing well I'm getting in
physical altercations I'm working at
this little bagel shop delivering bagels
and there's nothing wrong with that but
it's not much of a future in it for me
um I didn't end up going to the fire
service I didn't end up a professional
athlete I thought like what am I going
to do with like what am I going to do
right because the story of whatever
happened to me prior to that
was kind of meaningless unless I made
something of myself so that day I
actually wrote myself and my parents a
letter saying that I was going to turn
my life around and I actually still have
this letter my mother still has this
letter and what I decided to do was to
take a leave of absence from University
I didn't drop out a leave of absence
allows you the option to go back I moved
home and I worked so I was a bus boy at
a little restaurant in town where I grew
up and I still continue to run and do
resistance training you know three times
a week each or so and I went to
Community College which is um typically
where kids who can't afford to go to
university or get to that just stay back
for whatever reason it's a wonderful
aspect of the the um educational system
in California still and I made learning
and filling my mind with formal rigorous
course work-based knowledge my absolute
Mission now I didn't care if I liked it
I just it's like I'm going to trust my
ability to learn because I could tell
you a lot about tropical fish
skateboarding punk rock music a fair
amount about physical training at that
point I sought out the right people this
has always been something I've been good
at is seeking out the right people with
knowledge so I got great Knowledge from
the late Mike mener who had trained
Darian Yates um I was reading every book
I could on physical fitness and
Rehabilitation trying to get my body
strong um never wanted to be big you
know I was always interested in being
strong and being able to run far and
fast that was always a goal like a
capability I I've not been one of the um
people to like really care about like
hypertrophy that wasn't something that
mattered to me if some came along as a
consequence of training great but it was
more about a a capability to do things
so at that point I just became a
voracious learner I took every bit of
energy that I had applied to these other
areas and put them into learning math
science art history English literature
whatever you know coursework was thrown
at me and then after a year of that went
back to University lived alone in a
studio apartment and basically for the
remaining portion of University all I
did was study work out hang out with my
girlfriend run listen
to at that time like early 90s punk rock
music which is still a wonderful genre
so mainly like rancid Operation Ivy Bob
Dylan Always Love Bob Dylan classical
music when I study and that was it I
didn't do anything else and at that
point I started getting straight A
people didn't recognize me they're like
aren't you the guy from freshman year
that was getting in all these fights I
will admit that I wasn't um completely
devoid of of uh the typical College um
phenotype once a month I would allow
myself to go out to a party and I'd
party once a month but stayed away from
drugs was never never my thing and um so
drank which you know eventually I
realized wasn't my thing either but I
was just completely committed so I
graduated University with honors I went
to graduate school did a master's up at
uh UC Berkeley um then did my PhD did my
postto at Stanford and then eventually
got a Laboratory um first at UC San
Diego excellent Neuroscience program
eventually was recruited to Stanford uh
with tenure and all along maintaining
physical fitness in the background
focusing very heavily on doing primary
research meaning making discoveries in
neuroscience and Publishing papers and
then in
2019 I decided to start posting science
on Instagram just really nerdy stuff um
no protocols just telling people about
sunlight and the relationship to the eye
dopamine and ex I just enjoyed talking
about it just like I did when I was a
little kid telling people about tropical
fish and in
2020 my plan was to release a book so I
got a I a PR guy his name is Rob Moore
he's now a close friend of mine and we
were talking about how we would I don't
know maybe go on podcast or do something
of that sort when the book came out and
then the pandemic hit and I said you
know what let's pause the book and he
said well just maybe go on podcast so
that year 2020 I went on I think
somewhere between 20 and 30 podcasts no
book no website no nothing just like
talking science and delighted in that
and then January 2021
I got a little place um in a little uh
kind of Canyon region of Los Angeles a
little sabatical like uh Retreat and um
set up some cameras my Bulldog Costello
there Rob Moore became my podcast
producer and on January 1st more or less
we launched the hubman Lab podcast where
now I still just blab about stuff that I
find interesting and that I think can be
useful to people so that's the kind of
um that's the arc and as I tell all this
I also just want to make sure that
people know that it sounds like this
magnificent Arc but along the way there
were absolutely times when I thought oh
my like what am I going to do like this
is working but this isn't working and my
life at times became very lopsided I
focused mainly on work and research um
you know I'm 49 years old now I've had
some wonderful relationships across my
life but I opted to delay on marriage
and family as a way to uh well it wasn't
the intention but as a way to really
just continue to pour my energy into the
things that I was most passionate about
so there's always sacrifice there were
you know sadly I've lost a lot of
friends along the way to some to drugs
and alcohol suicide depression and so on
um others to just unfortunate
consequences or age but the um I think
the major themes have
been I just simply can't pull myself off
a desire to learn and Adventure through
a particular space and then once I learn
things and as I learn things I can't
seem to help but just tell everybody
about it you know provided there's
somebody there to listen then I'm eager
to share what what I learn it's funny in
life how some of the most traumatic
things that happened to us and Trauma is
such a subjective thing so what's trauma
for me is not for Francis enanu who I've
heard his story and you know walking out
of Africa and jumping over Bob wire and
walking across the Sahara Desert is an
amazing I just can't you know it's like
I hear he's a very nice guy as well he's
exceptionally nice he's a wonderful
individual but I'm I'm really interested
in how our traumatic experiences end up
um dragging us in whatever shape in life
dragging us or making us driven that
it's almost two sides of the same coin
sometimes but I just wanted to zoom back
in on when you were younger um because I
was reading about at sort of 14 15 years
old you were put into a residential
treatment program I was so one day in
school and by the way I wasn't in school
much and if I was there I was the kid
with the hoodie on it his head on the
table you know just kind of like
sleeping or drawing or um I was not
tuned into to what I should have been
tuned into um I was looking back I think
I was depressed I was sad I was confused
by the fracture of my family and listen
um divorce and family reorganization can
take place without all that
unfortunately this was a very
complicated situation um and maybe it
was also puberty
combined with General confusion about
life um those things um combined to you
know put me a state that I think looking
back I was I was scared depressed and
Confused like a lot of young people
happen to be at that age so a number of
things happened um I was getting into
trouble uh I wasn't attending school I
was Trent a lot um and yeah one day they
came to like get me they basically
called me into the office office I was
sitting there um talking to the school
counselor it wasn't my first time doing
that and then some other people showed
up there and I started to realize like
uhoh I think I know what this is um
which was they were going to take me
away um now the exact stimulus for all
this whether or not a friend I think I
know who it was had been concerned about
me and had intervened or whether or not
it was purely from the parent side isn't
clear to me still I have my theories
they have theirs um but in any event I
soon after found myself in a residential
treatment program and um it was
interesting because it was the first
time that I had ever had my freedom
taken away from me you know that was an
experience like doors go locked and
you're like whoa you know like what is
it my freedom taken away well you're
locked you're locked in a treatment
program basically you know these were
all kids that were delinquent or had
problems of various sorts so you're on a
hallway with a bunch of other kids um
you know you're staying there at night
you're not leaving you're not free to
walk to leave and they make you do group
therapy you have to do one-on-one
therapy um you have an hour to exercise
outside you're not leaving the the
grounds yeah this is a like a
combination of like if you were to just
sort of merge in your mind like Youth
detention and Hospital right that's kind
of the the the the unity of these now
kids there and they and we were kids
right um and there was a there was a
unit of much younger kids and there was
a unit of people much older than us and
I'll never forget what they said one of
the counselors there said to us listen
the kids over there the younger ones and
the adults over
there they're crazy you guys you're not
crazy you just have problems and I'll
never forget one of the kids that was in
there with me goes yeah but that's
exactly what they're telling the people
in the other two in the other two units
so pretty quickly I realized like this
place is is problematic and I was scared
I won't forget like my my roommate who
turned out to be a very kind person but
he looked like Richard Ramirez the
nightstalker and he had a cutting
problem and he was like a scary looking
guy but as I got to know him I realized
that he um was just a a kid with a lot
of problems different than mine but a
lot of problems so you're in there with
kids with severe drug issues with um
some were suicidal some weren't some had
aggression issues um it was a co-ed unit
during during the day obviously you're
you're housed you know it was boys with
boys girls with girls um and after about
2 3 days I realized okay the only way
out of here is to do the work so it did
the work I sat down and I started for
the first time really talking about what
was going on for me and listening you
can learn a lot in those places by
listening to what's going on for other
people and I realized that a lot of what
was going on internally for me had to do
with the fact that you know know you
know I mean what do we need we we
basically need safety and acceptance at
some level you know from from parents we
also need guard rails and at that time I
was lacking all three um and I think you
know my inherent intensity and I'm a
pretty um I'm not an emotional person in
the sense that I don't emote easily um
but I'm a very feeling person I feel a
lot I don't know how other people
perceive me but I feel a lot
and um I think what was happening in my
family unit at that time felt
devastating and um I missed my sister
she was off off in college she had gone
off to college I've always been really
close with my sister and and really
because this was like late well this was
late 80s early 90s I also didn't know
many people from homes without you know
a mom and dad this kind of thing and I
had been exposed to a lot already you
know that one of the beautiful things
about skateboarding at least back then
it's different now is that it was
completely self-organized so whenever I
could I would get a ride with a friend
or take the bus up to San Francisco
there was this now famous SL Infamous
scene the embarked arrow Plaza called
EMB was this kind of
self-organized place you have these in
major cities elsewhere there was love
park in Philadelphia you Washington
Square Park in New York and back then I
learned a lot from the older it was
mostly guys then now there's more women
in skateboarding girls and women in
skateboarding and they rip they're so
good but
um back then it was mostly guys and so I
learned all sorts of things there some
of which you know was far too young to
learn I got basically a street
education um from kids that weren't
going to school and who were just like
living this Wild free life and I do want
to be clear that even though there were
let's call them untour elements there
was also a an incredible beauty and like
you know my friend Jake
Rosenberg started going up there as well
he had his own challenges that I only
learned about later um and he brought a
video camera High eight video he started
filming the now like just like truly
iconic videos of Mike Caroll these names
will mean things to Henry Sanchez like
Mark Gonzalez like so he just started
filming all this and then he made the
first Plan B videos and he made the
waiting for lightning documentary about
Danny Way like jumping the Great Wall of
China and our friend Mike Bach who's the
photographer for the huberman Lab
podcast of all things who became one of
the most iconic Action Sports portrait
photographers was a kid who basically
drove out from Michigan I don't even
know if he graduated high school
something he probably did and then he
slept in the clothing Stacks at the Gap
Store hung out in EMB barad arrow and
took photos and those photos and those
videos that Mike and Jacob and other
people took are now iconic in
skateboarding and so I was also exposed
to this incredible world of DIY like
like take your passion take your
circumstance
and pick a craft and just document stuff
and so in many ways like what happened
at EMB barad AA what happened in
skateboarding and I always love punk
rock music and going to shows I have no
musical talent and I I didn't suck at
skateboarding but I wasn't going to go
anywhere with it but the what I saw was
if you love something and you want to
learn as much as possible about it and
you love the culture around it you do
have to learn how to sort out the unored
elements don't get yourself into trouble
but you take that energy and I just took
it to academics I remember realizing
when I got to graduate school I found a
wonderful lab to work in with a
wonderful woman named Barbara Chapman
unfortunately she passed away and at the
time she said listen I'm going to have a
couple kids but we have grants you can
so she said I'm going to have a couple
kids so I'm going to be very busy but we
have grants and here's the lab she said
don't burn the lab down don't hurt
yourself but just do experiments have
fun and I realized I was like this is
the best and I had so much energy and I
thought I never have to go home so I
lived there a lot of the time brush my
teeth in the sink there work out at the
gym gun shower come back and I remember
people saying you're going to burn out
what are you doing and I'm like what are
you talking about and I would work 80
sometimes 100 hours a week I was so
happy and I realized like this is the
exact same feeling I'm just taking my
interest and I'm just pouring myself
into I did that when I was a graduate
student I did it when I was a postto and
actually when I was a postto I started
writing some music um articles for
Thrasher magazine I've always kept some
little tie to the skateboarding industry
that way just to make some extra cash
and then when I was a junior Professor I
had to really pour myself just into the
laboratory but it still worked out and I
guess the point is that you know earlier
you and I were talking about if you have
and I'm borrowing in this phrase from
one of my heroes Martha Beck um who's a
wonderful person and teacher as such
wisdom and she calls it a um interest
based attention system some people might
call it ADHD but have you ever noticed
that even people and we know this from
the scientific literature people kids
adults with ADHD when they're so-called
ADHD when they are doing something they
really love they're like a laser they're
not going to peel off that their
attention is like level 11 out of 10 so
I took that energy that I've always had
in me for fish for tropical birds
skateboarding punk rock music eventually
it was biology and I just went okay here
are my chips I'm all in all in but the
goal has always been and remains to take
what I learn and share it because the
real joy in doing anything for me anyway
is the ability to share in that
knowledge or in that experience and so
um those early years were really choppy
and really dangerous you know frankly
but then when I started a laboratory and
decided hey I'm going to study human
stress let's go get VR of stressful
circumstances and my friend Michael
Mueller who's a very accomplished
portrait photographer in Hollywood and
also takes photos of great white sharks
out of cages he said to me oh you know
your VR stimulus in your lab um here's
what he told me he he's like it sucks he
said it sucks it doesn't look real it's
all CGI it's not scary at all how about
we you know go film some great white
sharks down in Guadalupe Island and we
leave the cage and you know the the
young Andrew was like okay so got dive
certified went and did it one year
stayed in the cage went the next year
exited the cage I'm not recommending
people live this way I'm not because I
had an air failure at depth the second
year while I was in the cage I bailed
out I made it I lived but it was super
scary and it was not an experience I
want to repeat and I realized you know
that's the line like I you know the
great Oliver Sachs Another Hero Of Mine
British train neurologist and and author
he wrote uh was basically what became
the script for Awakenings and things
like that
um there's a quote about him that
resonates a lot and the quote I think is
I you know uh an early teacher of his
said Oliver will go far provided he does
not go too far and so you know you have
to be careful right these Adventures
leaving school doing you can't be
halfhazard about it so if you look at
the broad Arc it's highly nonlinear but
there's a Common Thread through all of
it which is this desire to learn
curiosity Des to share
intensity and when I'm involved in any
one thing and I recommend that if people
are involved in any one thing if it's
podcasting or sport or video games or
math or AI or program whatever it is
skateboarding whatever it is that you
can't be halfhazard in that
world because forward progress even if
you change things over time is the
consequence of taking that inherent
uniqueness that we each have and
whatever level of intensity we have and
making sure that you you know do take
steps forward and there are what I've
learned is as a child as an adolescent
and as an adult there are all these
traps along the way they're all these
shoots down to failure and destruction
and you have to be very very thoughtful
and so you can't be
Reckless I'm really compelled as well by
the letter you sent to your
parents yeah they they must have been
very surprised that letter was written
in a house on a little Street in a
little town called IA Vista on pado
street where I'd essentially been
squatting for the summer with my feret
that was the I tell you that because
that was the picture I had a ferret her
name was Iris that my first girlfriend
who had left me by then because she was
smart because I had nothing going on
um we were me and Iris were living
together I didn't even have a bed in the
place I thought well why pay rent you
know like no one in like where I grown
up with all these like like Riff Raff
kids now the town to be clear the town I
grew up in pal Alto now is known as like
one of the wealthiest places that time
it was like kind of upper middle class
but when I say like Riff Raff kids I
mean like the people that congregated
around skateboarding in the late 80s
early 90s were the kind of like
parentless fer feral types so I learned
a lot I learned I can sleep mummy style
anywhere in a car in a van in a corner
so like why pay rent that summer I'd
have more money to keep and save if I
just like got a pillow and a couple
blankets and a sleeping bag and this
little place I was living there with my
feret and I came back from that fight on
July 4th and I thought okay like this is
it and I think it was by the end of the
weekend I had written out this letter
that said
essentially the following it said look I
don't know why you guys decided to just
fracture
everything I understood why my parents
didn't want to be together they were
incompatible by the way they're both
happily married now to wonderful people
for many years so there there's a happy
ending there but at the time I was very
confused it wasn't that that I needed
them to be together but the level of
friction in their separation was just
like it I felt like a lot of it fell on
me and and there are reasons for that
but I basically forgave them I basically
said listen I forgive you um I realized
that I need to take control of my life I
was 18 so I'm a fall baby so it was like
I was almost
19 I'm you know 18 years old old 19
years old and I need to do something
with my life and the only way I'm going
to do that is by getting super focused
and super organized so I somehow had the
the idea to externalize this and then I
wrote essentially the same letter to
myself and then I just as my girlfriend
who eventually got back together with me
that was interesting as soon as I
started working hard in school I'll
never forget what she said we're still
friendly she's married with her own
family and they have a a beautiful
family but every once in a while I'll
hear from her and I will never forget
what she said to me about a year later
when I was just absolutely rabid about
learning she said um you know you've
become a monster and I was like a
monster and she's like yeah a monster of
learning and class and getting up early
and you tuck your shirt in like I got
into this whole thing of like dressing
the opposite of everyone else that lived
in that little town it's a little beach
toown everyone wore flip-flops rode
beach cruisers at that time it was like
baggy shorts long t-shirts and I start
tucking in my shirt a belt I would get
like all like you know like cleaned up
and i' and I'd go to class and people
like what is wrong with this guy I just
wanted to go completely Against the
Grain and just be as disciplined and
organized as possible and I basically
was parenting myself and I think that
this is something that I learned how to
do early on I love my parents but I
learned how to mother and father myself
and that was powerful it was like I was
a young guy um but let's face it you
know at 19 you're young but you're not
that young in the sense that if you
screw up you know if you you know I
don't know I had friends who got into
drunk driving stuff a friend of ours was
killed in a drunk driving accident um I
wasn't real close with him but I knew
him real well this guy Phil sha great
skateboarder was killed because someone
drove drunk he wasn't driving drunk dead
bunch of people dead are in jail so you
know when you're 18 or older like the
consequences go super super linear you
know shift um where small mistakes can
lead to really bad outcomes so yeah I
just kind of scruffed myself and was
like let's do this and you know here I
am I'm so intrigued by that because in
that moment you have I think a moment in
which a lot of people are searching for
in their lives where you have a you have
a decision to do it differently and I've
always wondered what it takes for
someone to get there and is it something
that you can accelerate towards like is
there if I'm laying on the couch right
now and I'm feeling that is there
something I can do to get me there or do
I need more pain feel year for you I'll
tell you super scary being like almost
19 years old girlfriend left me I'm not
good at anything I wasn't good at
anything not skateboarding couldn't play
an instrument everyone in that town
surfed um family family I mean I didn't
yeah I could have gone to the fire
service and that's a wonderful career
path
um yeah I didn't I didn't have any like
Market skills I couldn't really do
anything except I knew my capacity to
learn I've always had a very good memory
and I've always enjoyed learning so I
thought okay School seems like a good
option they tell you what you need to
know in fact at one point I realized and
I think it was Ryan Holliday that said
that you know the people who should
absolutely not drop out of college are
the people who are not doing well
because the real world is a lot harder
in many ways it's a lot harder than
College in college they tell they tell
you what to do I remember taking a class
in Greek mythology you go there if you
sit near the front you pay attention you
try not to pay attention to anyone else
you sit down they tell you what you need
to know now sometimes it's complicated
you can't keep up but then they have
these things called office hours where
you can ask they have teaching
assistance I mean the whole thing is set
up so that you almost can't fail if you
do the required steps whereas with
skateboarding it's like I was always
getting broke off as they say you know I
was always rolling my left foot snapped
again uh nothing nothing couldn't do it
um there's so much uncertainty in other
things at least with a college education
for me it was like okay I can I can
learn this stuff and then what I found
is when there's a desire to learn and
then you learn and then you do well and
I started doing very well um and but
there's that one class that I got a B
plus in that I'm still pissed off about
you know my first year was a disaster
then it was all LA and then there's this
one class
in neural development from Ben Reese and
I got a
B+ and as a consequence when I went to
graduate school I studied neural
development you know it's the thing that
you don't get the the place where you
make an error that you forever carry
that signal I need to get better at that
so I think a lot of it is just having
the the knowledge of self right what did
the Oracle say know thyself the
knowledge of self to really think okay
like what are my strengths do I like to
learn if I'm interested in something do
I have a voracious appetite maybe if
you're a person with less energy um
maybe uh you're more reflective or you
like to journal or you need more time to
process I think turning what often
appear as weaknesses into strengths is
really possible and then I do think that
we are all each endowed with some unique
gift I really believe in this um it's
not mystical for me I think that we all
have some wiring of our brains that's
very similar and we all have some unique
WI iring based on our genetics and our
experience and I just thought I'm going
to keep paying attention to what fills
my body with energy one of the most
inspiring and I think liberating things
that I've heard in your work is this
idea of neuroplasticity because if
you're if the brain can physiologically
change based on what I'm doing then it
means that who I am now my identity that
60 that 19-year-old who's sleeping in
the mummy thing with the ferret isn't
who I always have to be I can literally
change
um we've spoken a little bit around like
what causes the motivation to actually
change but knowing that there's a my
brain will actually change those two
things are really inspiring for me
because it means that whatever rut I'm
stuck in isn't necessarily a permanent
one now you said that the motivation to
change comes from Fear well in my case
it took a a fear circumstance fear of
becoming a permanent failure yeah to
motivate immense change and um uh that
was that circumstance I I do believe
however that the best work our most
creative and best work comes from a love
of craft but sometimes in order to find
what you truly love you have to be
scared into setting off on a path to
find it and um yeah and and and that
goes for relationships too sometimes to
find the right relationship um or
relationships it could be friendships
romantic relationships Etc one has to
be like deathly afraid of having to
remain in the the relationship that
you're in enough to leave so
neuroplasticity is absolutely real um it
actually worked out that my scientific
great-grandparents two guys David huil
and Torsten weasel won the Nobel Prize
for no for neuroplasticity now they
weren't the people who discovered it it
had actually been described for
centuries people understood that young
kids can learn more easily than adults
can but David and tor won the Nobel
Prize for essentially formalizing the
and discovering the principles of
neuroplasticity how it works and then
some years later mainly one guy by the
name of Mike merenik but there were
others that worked with him discovered
that neuroplasticity is actually a
feature of the nervous system the brain
throughout our entire lifespan the rules
change a little bit in terms of how you
rewire your brain but if the question is
can a person change can you learn new
thing can you unlearn certain patterns
can you overcome traumas at any age the
answer is
absolutely categorically yes how well
it's very clear that as a child until
about age 25 more or less just passive
experience will shape the brain for
better or worse after about age 25 and
again these are not strict
cutoffs we can change our brain but
what's required is a market shift in the
neuro chemical environment under which
something happens so one of the reasons
why any traumatic event will forever be
remembered although by the way you can
remove some of the emotional load of
that trauma does not have to be
traumatic
forever is because when we see or
experience something very intense of a
fearful nature there is the release of
certain what we call neuromodulators
things like epinephrine adrenaline and
other neuromodulators that cause a St
shift in our body and brain and the
nervous system recognizes this as
unusual and as a consequence in the
subsequent days there's reordering of
the connections so that the brain can
prepare for that event should it happen
again this is why we have what's called
one trial learning you go to a certain
location something terrible happens
there you will forever associate that
location with something terrible but
there are tools therapy and other tools
that can allow the emotional load to be
removed from that so that you could go
to that location and feel calm no fear
whatsoever the good news is you can also
learn anything you want to learn
provided there's a shift in this
neurochemical environment this is why
when we are very interested and focused
on something two of the main
requirements for neuroplasticity we have
to be alert and we have to be focused we
can't learn passively as adults we can't
just play um you know a a lecture about
Ai and large language models or
neuroscience in the room and then it
just the knowledge doesn't just sink in
by
osmosis but if we pay attention and
we're alert when we pay
attention there's a shift in the
neurochemicals associated with that
attention what we call the catac
colomines it's three molecules dopamine
epinephrine and norepinephrine all which
cause an increase in alertness all which
cause an increase in focus a tightening
of our visual field and our auditory
field so like cones of attention is one
way to think about it and then it sets
in motion a bunch of biolog iCal
processes such that if we get adequate
sleep that night maybe the next night as
well there's reordering of neural
connection so that that knowledge that
new experience is Consolidated in your
brain you are forever changed as a
consequence of that experience so when
we hear that the brain is constantly
changing everything that we encounter
changes our brain that's not true why
would the brain change unless it needed
to right as a child the brain is
basically a template for change it's
it's trying to understand the
environment and make predictions and so
that's true neuroplasticity is is a
cardinal feature of of childhood and
Adolescence and the teen years just
think about the music you listened to
when you were a teen no other music will
ever have as much significance and
that's because as a teen your body is
flooded with hormones and
neuromodulators that the amount of
meaning that comes from now seemingly
trivial events when you're a teenager or
adolescent is immense that song meant so
much and it's because of the
neurochemical meu it creates in you you
but as an adult it takes a stronger
stimulus as we say and if you were to
fall in love as an adult or see
something a painting that just strikes
you as just so
unbelievable yes then you are forever
changed but just going to see a bunch of
paintings at the Met doesn't mean that
every single one of those paintings is
forever stamped into your brain the the
nervous system is very um efficient in
that way it doesn't change unless it has
to and it always Chang es if it needs to
in order to keep you safe this is why
there's an asymmetric influence of fear
as opposed to um just interest in terms
of what will shift our brain but it's
nice to know that love and excitement
and appreciation are very strong stimula
for changing the brain and um you know I
can kind of draw to mind conversations
I've had with my good friend Rick Rubin
I'll get accused of name dropping but
I'm very fortunate to be close friends
with Rick and Rick always talks about
you know how when you just see and
experience something and you just have
this love for it it changes the brain
he's not a neuroscientist but in many
ways he's a neuroscientist so in any
case you absolutely can change your
brain but you have to pay attention to
the thing you want to incorporate into
your brain you have to be alert while
you do that and then you absolutely have
to go get some rest because it's during
sleep and during meditative States and
during rest that the actual rewiring of
the brain occurs there's a phrase that
you can't teach an old dog new tricks
and I think as we get older and older we
become stubborn in part because we're
very comfortable with the way things are
and routine and whatever but also I
think we start to believe in this idea
that we can't change and that in in and
of itself makes it harder to change are
you telling me that you can teach an old
dog new tricks yeah I'm so glad you
brought this up um let's just destroy
that myth now you abs absolutely can
teach an old dog or human New Tricks we
know this in fact there's studies
incredible studies that were done down
at the sulk Institute in San Diego
showing that even in people who are
very old right these are people in their
80s and 90s you know the human lifespan
probably maximum human lifespan as we
understand it is probably about 120
years more or less but most people don't
make it to 100 but so 80 or 90 is pretty
old mhm there's still addition of new
neurons occurring these people who were
unfortunately dying of terminal cancer I
believe but other causes agreed to take
a a die that actually gets incorporated
into new neurons and then after they
died their brains were um you know
looked at under the microscope and there
was the addition of new neurons even at
late age now I want to be very clear
that most of learning is not the
addition of new neurons at least not in
humans but from everything we know about
neuroscience
it's clear that doesn't matter if you're
90 years old 70 years old 50 years old
if you want to learn you can learn and
that learning occurs through
neuroplasticity which is the reordering
of neural connections strengthening of
certain connections weakening of others
and in some rare cases the addition of
new neurons but Brain Change is
absolutely real at every stage of life I
also wonder about habit formation so you
said there that some of the more sort of
startling stimuluses like fear are great
ways and and obsessive sort of deep
focus are great ways to start forming
these new Behavior patterns but if I
want to break a habit because there's
habits I've got in my life that I've
kind of just told myself are who I am
and accordingly I've just kind of
accepted them well you've been very
successful so yeah but even we' all
there's all thing thank you but there's
many things I'd still I've just accepted
it's part of who I am some of those come
from my childhood so one of them is that
I grew up in a very disorganized home
where like the doors inside my house had
holes in them and our house there was
like some rooms that looked like a
hoarder lived there just piles and piles
of stuff to the roof um house de
demolished in many respects like the
back of the garden was six foot high it
was it was mess so I've grown up with
mess and I'm therefore still pretty
messy today and it's something I've
always wanted to defeat but I just
sometimes I tell myself well it you know
it was hard wide into me when I was a
kid and it it is just who I am and a lot
of people go around saying that they've
just kind of identified with and
accepted a certain bad habit is part of
who they are well I will say that some
of the most brilliant people I know had
terribly messy offices and they were
very internally organized people was
kind of interesting they were like a
laser beam in their ability to kind of
sort through mess they didn't see the
mess in fact my postto adviser who also
sadly passed away an incredible Human by
the name of Ben Baris used to walk into
his office and there'd just be piles of
stuff everywhere and I'd say Ben I I
think we should clean your office and
he'd say don't touch anything because if
you move anything I won't know where it
is and I said how could you possibly
know where anything is right now and he
say I know where everything is and so I
think some people also by growing up in
or being in that environment also
maintain an uncanny ability to find
things whereas I'm the sort of person
where I can't do any work until
everything is cleared away and so um I
see myself as on the weaker side of this
ability um but to your question I
think stories are very powerful and very
dangerous stories are the way that
humans organize knowledge by and large
right we don't tend to organize things
into lists we have these narratives that
we call stories because from a young age
we learn things not just by hearing them
and seeing them but they are
compartmentalized into narratives that
have a beginning a middle in an end
sometimes they have a uh kind of a
crescendo and then a relaxation just
think about a childhood song of learning
like the ABCs they don't teach you the
ABCs A B CDE E F G H I J right they
don't do that what do they do they give
you a song which is a story musicians
will understand this inherently again
I'm not one but when I started
researching Neuroscience of Music in the
brain came to understand so it's a b c d
e f g right the change in the inflection
as one does the alphabet as a young kid
is the story of the alphabet now people
might say okay what is he talking about
what's happening here is you create
variation in terms of batching of ideas
so that something has a beginning a
middle and an end so if you think okay I
grew up in this house and it was really
messy and now I have too much mess and
in order to undo that there's this kind
of like hardwired right dangerous words
hardwired neural circuitry in my brain
that I would have to work really really
hard undo and I'd have to be scared into
being a cleaner person or you know I'm a
tidier person whatever it is that's very
dangerous because there's a beginning to
that a middle to that and an end to that
and it has immense meaning as a
consequence one of the most powerful
things is to understand that
neuroplasticity really involves taking
an existing story and dismantling some
component of it what could the component
be well there's all this stuff like the
Byron Katie work which says you know you
you take something that you believe as
true and you say okay like uh like I'm
an untidy person and then you counter it
how do I know that well okay I have this
experience okay that's the story then
you start running counter narratives you
say I'm uh I'm uh actually a tidy person
and then people say well this is silly
you're just lying to yourself right
where they say is it always true that
you're a messy person you start
challenging this story from different
sides now I believe as because I'm a
neuroscientist I'm not um in I'm not a
psychologist or in the self-help world
that the Brilliance the kind of
unconscious Genius of that approach is
actually that what one is doing is
you're starting to create a new story
you're starting to kind of Infuse
different questions into the existing
neural network now the brain loves
questions like the the brain since we're
we're young kids we're asking questions
and so if you take an existing story and
you start challenging it with questions
you're not saying lie to yourself you're
not suddenly going to say okay like I'm
super tidy you're not because you're not
going to believe that but if you start
challenging why it's that way or you
know you've been able to change so many
other things why you wouldn't you be
able to change that you say it's just a
habit I can't do it you say well what's
a habit and you start poking and pushing
and pushing what you eventually arrive
at is this kind of huh actually there's
nothing keeping me from being a tidy
person except this kind of fluency of a
particular story what you've done is
you've interrupted the fluency of that
story so then when you go to the
behavior of you know do you set things
down all over the place or do you put
them in an orderly fashion you start
interrupting the Habit the fluency of
your typical Behavior so I raised this
as a as a way um to kind of shine light
on essentially what I do in my podcast
career which is you know we I I believe
very strongly in the fields of
psychology I think self-help has some
wonderful things to offer we've got
ancient wisdom that goes way back and
when you start to look at things through
the lens of biology you start to see
that all of these things actually have
Merit and they're just different paths
to the same outcomes so if you want to
become a tidy person I would encourage
you here would be one let's just say
Neuroscience supported approach would be
to write out one page about what a tidy
person you really are you'll know that's
a lie right and then to look at it and
realize that in many ways if you just
replac tidy with you know messy at any
location it'd probably be the exact same
story and so what you're really talking
about here is just a def fault that your
nervous system is running and if you
were to just swap the words would you
feel differently or do differently on
the one hand you'd say no that's kind of
trivial but I bet you the practice of
writing it out would forever interrupt
your notion of like just going to set
something down you be like ah now you
have something to kind of disrupt The
Habit because so much of habit
disruption that you'll look like some
people say oh you flick a a you know
rubber band on your wrist or something
like that there's nothing special about
the rubber band there's nothing special
about the pain on your wrist or the you
put a sticky note we know sticky notes
work for about one day why don't sticky
notes work why don't reminders on the
mirror work because they don't have
enough salience they're not new they're
not different the nervous system only
changes if something is new and
different so anyway we could talk a lot
about habit formation but fear works but
so does disrupting the story how do you
disrupt the story you
essentially give the opposite story and
you think well that's just lying to
myself but neurally it makes sense
because the nervous system again likes
to be very economical likes to do
everything with the minimum amount of uh
energetic expenditure and to change
anything requires attention and
attention is expensive attention is
expensive and also I would say as I'm
kind of rambling all
this things are going very well for you
so you actually don't have any reason to
tidy your space I have PA now and
another PA and I have a cleaner so it's
do you know what I mean the yeah you
Outsource it yeah great well there is
incentive for all the folks that feel
like they're not um tidy enough you have
two choices you can either start to be
tidy now or you can be successful enough
that you can hire some assistants and I
actually think I say this in with in all
seriousness I think that one has to ask
like where is my attention in neural
real estate best devoted I think about
this every day I mean we are living in a
war of attention I wake up in the
morning and I can be a consumer or a
Creator if I reach for my phone I'm a
consumer if I go to my journal I'm a
creator
my advice to anyone who wants to be
successful in any domain is to do things
away from where you broadcast and then
take it to that broadcast I mean take
your real life to Instagram and be very
cautious about taking Instagram to your
real life does that make sense if you
look at successful people they're doing
things away from the platforms and
putting them on the platforms yeah so I
have to be very careful then I go into
the kitchen obviously I talk to people
in my home
um but if I pick up the phone and I
start making a phone call it's like is
this call really about
moving the needle forward or is this
just kind of like passive use of of
attention we have to be so careful
nowadays so so careful it's really
challenging on that point of focus and
attention and thinking back to when you
were 19 years old one of the things
people ask me a lot and I guess it's a
bit of a debate in the self-help world
is from a neuroscience perspective is
manifestation and this idea of like
visualization visualizing who I want to
become and you know where I'm going is
there any Neuroscience to support that
that works there is um and I'm not
trying to be negative but I'll start
with the negative counter example for
which there is evidence and it's less
often discussed so there's a wonderful
researcher at New York University by the
name of Emily baltis who talks about how
for goal setting and habit formation
fear setting is of often one of the best
tools you spend some time maybe five
minutes or so thinking about all the
terrible things that are going to happen
if you don't actually accomplish your
goals nobody likes to do this but guess
what it turns out to be pretty darn
effective really I know it's really
frustrating that this is the case but
again you know that has a lot to do with
the way that the human brain is is wired
and and likes to rewire itself now that
said it is important to Envision
goals visualizing goals in detail um
writing them out in some cases talking
about them although we can discuss that
um why that might not be the best idea
in every circumstance and could be very
beneficial because it's hard to conceive
something that you can't imagine but I
think when people hear that visualizing
goals or visualizing outcomes is
critical we sometimes forget that we
don't always know what the end goal is
sometimes we have to break this up into
Milestones this is where I think uh Rick
Rubin even though he's not a formally
trained scientist
um has drawn a lot of interest for his
work on creativity which is you know
Rick is about largely you know sensing
the kind of energetic pull of an idea
and being able to explore that without
too much self- judgment or filtering or
thinking about how it's going to be
received in other words that the
metamorphosis that leads to great music
great poetry great scientific discovery
podcasts finance companies that one is
building Etc is a series of iterations
that occur on the time course of about a
day you know and so we can't always
imagine the end or the end product as
the outcome this is why I said
University is easy compared to other
goals because the end is a degree right
say you pick up your diploma like
whereas in other areas it's far more
mysterious often now visualization I
think can be very powerful but perhaps
what's more powerful is to learn the
brain and body state that best serves
the work you're going to do so for
instance if I'm going to do some writing
and right now I'm working on a book it's
largely done but I'm writing some bonus
chapters unless I'm hyper motivated to
do that when I sit down and hyperfocused
I'll spend two three minutes just
closing my eyes focusing on my breathing
it's meditation of sorts but what I tell
myself is if I can't focus on my
breathing for two or three minutes how
in the world am I going to focus on
writing for two or three hours that sort
of thing the other thing that I want to
make sure I don't forget is I mentioned
that telling people your goals often
times can be useful if it stimulates a
little bit of fear like you have some
accountability but we also know that
because of the affiliative nature of
people in particular people that support
us there is this danger uh a friend of
mine who's a cardiologist at UCSF taught
me this he said you know be careful who
you tell that you're going to start a
podcast or write a book because
oftentimes the response will be oh yeah
that's great you absolutely should write
a book or you should do a podcast and
people get a sort of reward from telling
people about it and then they never
actually go do it whereas I can cite
numerous examples of where people were
told you're never going to be able to do
that you're never going to be able to be
successful in that and my goodness those
people dig their heels and they show
that they can do it now I get into
debates about this with Rick from time
to time it's a you know it's unclear to
me whether or not the energy around
trying to prove oneself is detrimental
to the
outcome and I sense it is right this
kind of grinding against like take that
and take that as opposed to just doing
things out of real love of craft I think
about the way I felt about Aquaria and
fish as a kid and it's just like pure
delight that's the word that comes to
mind just Delight I want to learn more
about it I want to do it and tell people
about
it that's the wonderful romantic picture
of effort and progress and outcomes but
in reality you probably need both you
need to be able to access some fear and
sense of competition but also Delight in
craft you know like Peter Teal's book 0o
to one as I recall defines competition
as anti-cre creativity in many ways
because through competition You Are by
definition changing what you're doing in
order to outdo somebody else or
something else and so you're morphing
your Creation in order to kind of
overcome something something whereas if
you're just purely thinking about
something you want to grow and cultivate
they're none of those barriers but in
the worlds that I've been in science to
a lesser extent podcasting and that's a
wonderful feature of podcasting but
certainly in science it is hyperco
competitive right two Laboratories
working on similar things people are
concerned that if one publishes first
the other will not be able to publish
certainly not in as high quality a
journal and jobs are created through
these Journal Publications podcasting is
actually a wonderful field um because
let's say you and I have the same guest
on our podcast all it does is raise it
in the algorithm it's not like you know
and and it's such a and so I think
there's a lot of um collegiality and
camaraderie in the podcast field that um
exists in little pockets in science but
um science is a brutally competitive
field which doesn't mean it's anti-
creative but in a dream world where
there's infinite amount of money for
scientific research because that would
better Humanity in my in my view um and
people didn't have to be competitive
about Grant dollars or publication I
think we would make far more progress as
a species so competition
Fosters outcomes this is clear in
markets it's clear in a lot of domains
but pure love and Delight of craft and
creativity that's definitely the way to
go but in most Endeavors you got to have
both if sitting next to someone in class
and realizing okay because this was me
back when I'm thinking okay I I love
this topic but gosh I want that Top Mark
I want that top mark on the distribution
like that's and and like she and he are
really really good and I'm GNA we're
going to study together but my god when
it comes time for that exam like I'm
going for it a little bit of competition
can can bring out our our best I think
um certainly in sport but when it comes
to creative Endeavors that are really
about our own unique contribution I mean
you could tell me more about this in
business because you're you're I don't
you know I have a company but I'm not a
business person but I I always feel like
competition can bring out more energy
but not more
creativity yeah and I think a big point
I was thinking as you were talking was
just about how much you let that new
energy that comes from competition
distract you and this is It's the
distraction that can destroy you because
if Apple are going this way and they're
building this product without the
keyboard and without the stylus and
that's they've got their Vision than
they see Samsung doing over there
something over there and if they if they
divert from their own mission and their
own first principles towards what
someone else are doing then that's when
it can become destructive but if it
means that they see Samsung doing
something and they speed up and invest
more in their Vision then it's okay I
think that's and it is this dichotomy
between competition does drive better
outcomes for everybody that's competing
but at the same time um yeah it can harm
you if it distracts you in a fundamental
way it's kind of how I think about it
even with podcasting like you know um as
you were saying there's so many podcast
is doing so many amazing things like I I
look at your podcast and I learn from it
but I know in my cor we all know I'm
never going to be Andrew huberman and
I'll never be you and I'll never be a
Joe R I'll never be a Lex and I admire
your podcast very much and Joe's and
Lex's I think it's we each have our own
unique style that we bring to it Chris
Williamson you know um
it's been a lot of fun to see the unique
flavors of podcasts crop up and how
similar that is to the world I grew up
in in skateboard in the observations of
from the music industry that I saw
firsthand or that you know Rick has
passed along you know in the end I think
any creative Endeavor is really about
and here I don't want to sound
mysterious or woo it's about the energy
that we bring it's about taking our life
history and bringing it to that thing in
whatever form we don't even need to tell
people our life history taking our
unique wiring and bringing it to that
thing and we can again look at things
through the lens of biology and say well
what are we talking talking about when
we're talking about energy what is this
energy thing that people are talking
about um and I think it largely boils
down to these catamin the dopamine
epinephrine norepinephrine cocktail that
is setting the brain into a mode of
attention of motivation we now know
dopamine is more about motivation to
seek rewards as opposed to feeling of
pleasure or reward there's a lot to be
said about that and keep in mind that
these three neurochemicals
dopamine norepinephrine and
epinephrine have been the neurochemical
cocktail by which humans and other
mammals have set and pursued goals for
hundreds of thousands of years so we
don't have like a unique system a unique
neurochemical system for seeking out of
mates versus food versus creating
shelter versus creating technology and
whole
societies and it's not just these three
neurochemicals certainly there are other
things involves acetal choline and you
know a bunch of other things
neuroplasticity for that matter but it's
clearly the case that the currency that
the brain has set around getting us into
forward Center of mass as I say to like
Envision something explore nope not down
there this way ah there's a scent here
and trade out an actual scent for you
know oh there's something interesting
here there's someone interesting here
and like exploring that no that's a dead
path too C theack turn around go oh and
then connecting these nodes of progress
what's progress ah there's kind of
another surge of these catacol amines
which sets us in forward Center of mass
you know I don't want to oversimplify
the biology but when we talk about
energy um for instance taking time to
rest at night sleep taking time to maybe
meditate a few minutes or do this
practice that I'm a huge fan of nonsleep
deep rest which is kind of a body scan
deep relaxation long
exhales it's a practice very similar to
an ancient practice called Yoga Nidra
which has been practiced for thousands
of years it's a kind of pseudo sleep and
we know from a really nice study that
nsdr non-sleep deep rest AKA Yoga Nidra
can increase the Baseline levels of
dopamine in a brain area called the
basil ganglia which is
for Action generation and also
withholding action by about 60% from
Baseline just a a short period of doing
this practice can re kind of re dopamine
levels to a considerable extent it's a
remarkable study and there others like
it so what does that mean well it means
that in rest we build up this capacity
to be forward Center of mass when we
emerge from rest that's why I think we
have to sleep every 24 hours this is why
practices where we deliberately calm
ourselves and still ourselves allow us
to be more forward Center of mass
mentally and physically afterwards it's
kind of a duh when we hear it we kind of
go oh duh of course rest action rest
action but there's a lot more to it if
you start exploring the layers you start
realizing that excitement for things um
versus burnout what's burnout it's just
trying to be forward Center of mass for
too long
it's you know misuse of our dopamine
circuitry it's you know ignoring the
fact that these catamin and dopamine in
particular they are not infinite in
their availability right there's a
reservoir of them that can be depleted
but it can be rep replenished as well
and one of the best analogies for this
um was actually explained to me by a guy
named Dr Kyle Gillette he does some
online work as a as a um public facing
physician Endocrinology in particular
and he said but dopamine it's kind of
like a wave pool you have this Reservoir
that can allow you to pursue things or
scroll the internet or build businesses
whatever it is if you are really forward
Center of mass very intensely you start
generating these waves and if you get
big waves of dopamine and they crash out
of the pool you start depleting the
reservoir so when I think about drugs of
abuse Like Cocaine which leads to huge
surges in dopamine or um amphetamines
huge surges and dopamine what do we know
about huge surges and dopamine well
after those huge surges you drop below
your initial Baseline to a state in
which the same thing doesn't feel as
good anymore you need so much more
energy to get the same output that's
what this is right that's what this is
so I'll put this on the screen for
anyone yeah so my colleague at Stanford
Dr an ly who runs our dual diagnosis
addiction clinic and wrote the wonderful
book dopamine Nation described this best
you know it's sort of like a seesaw but
what whereby you get a big peak in
dopamine let's say from a drug of abuse
Like Cocaine people on cocaine it's all
about ideas and what's next they're not
like hey let's just kick back it's all
about what's they in fact they have a
million ideas per second most of them
are terrible ideas but they're very
forward Center of mass motivated and
then when the drug wears off they feel
very low and very depressed the dopamine
is actually depleted below Baseline
people that work excessively right we
all have different abilities to work out
but people that work excessively and
abuse stimulants in order to do that
achieve these Peaks is that like so what
would be the an everyday example of that
working excessively do you mean like a
pre-workout or something what you mean
yeah I'm not anti- pre-workout listen I
love to be well rested hydrated have a
nice pre-workout drink maybe even a
little shot of espresso listen to some
music and have an incredible leg day
workout it's an amazing feeling right
but if you do that every single time you
start stacking all these catac colomine
release inducing drugs okay so you're
getting adrenaline you're getting
epinephrine which is adrenaline excuse
me you're getting adrenaline you're
getting noradrenaline also called
norepinephrine you're getting dopamine
release you're highly motivated you're
in that state that everyone is seeking
and you try and do that seven days a
week you're not going to do it and then
you wonder why the afternoon you're just
completely cooked and you can't do any
cognitive work well your dopamine and
other things have crashed below Baseline
so I think it's important to understand
that being as I'm calling it Forward
Center of mass like really kind of
motivated and pursuing goals is great
but most of the time we're probably best
off just coming off the gas pedal just a
little bit to maintain that ability to
continue to be forward Center of mass
the same thing is true for stress we
hear stress is bad well stress is bad
but it also sharpens your ability to
learn it creates energy it actually
boosts your immune system in the short
term I
say tolerate as much stress as you
can provided you still behave like a
kind person right don't say or do things
that are unkind and make sure that you
still get great sleep at night most
people stress stress stress stress
stress run around and then they can't
sleep at night and then the next day
they're depleted but a little bit of
stress is healthy life is stressed
things are stressful but again you're
going to be in your best state of mind
if you're calm and alert alert and calm
is the is the magic recipe and the
ability to sleep at night if you want to
take a bunch of pre-workout and you want
to listen to some loud music and have a
great crushit workout great but you
should probably also be able to train
without all of that if you're somebody
who loves new goals and you you know
you're very excited about travel and
this and that great but do you have to
layer in 50 things and then you're
sitting around at home and you're
wondering why you're so bored when
you're back home and why life is so
depressing and you need more travel more
stimulation in every domain of life we
see whether or not it's food or exercise
or stimulants or sex or media if you
push things to the max you're going to
feel depleted and UND stimulated
afterwards and this trough below
Baseline as Anna lmy taught us with
dopamine
nation that trough is a state that can
last a long time and it's how long it's
proportional to how high that Peak and
dopamine was not how long but how high
that Peak and dopamine was and when
you're in that trough that dopamine
depleted State typically what people do
is they try and go out or access things
that are going to reactivate the
dopamine circuitry and all it does is
drive them further and further and
longer and longer into that trough
what's needed is a period of waiting of
nonindulgent in any of these excesses
that allows them to return to Baseline
we know this from drugs of abuse it
takes more and more drug to try and get
what turns out to be less and less of a
high most all addiction most all
compulsive Behavior can be cured
essentially through a period of
abstinence lasting somewhere between 30
and 60 days which to somebody who's
highly motivated to seek that thing or
do that thing sounds like an absolute
horror but that is highly effective so
for some people it's work and stimulants
you know and number of people taking
Aderall and work work work work work I
hear from these people all the time
typically they are from the tech and
finance world they're like why am I
burnt out well you've been blasting
these catac colomine regulated circuits
for years you need to just except you're
going to feel a little low for a week
then you're going to feel a little less
low then you're going to come back to
Baseline and then and only then can you
really get back into like full forward
Center of mass but at that point you can
introduce you know I I do think there is
a clinical use case for certain ADHD
meds which are amphetamine there are
certain people that need those meds
other people have driven themselves into
this dopamine trough and so they're
seeking out anything and everything to
get them out of that trough when really
what they need to do is stay away from
all that stuff and just wait just wait
go on holiday or something go on holiday
try and find reward in smaller things um
you know this is why dogs are wonderful
in simpler things and if that sounds
heavy and dull to you chances are you're
a bit in the dopamine uh loop um I've
been in these Loops before they're hard
to exit but once you exit them you look
back on them you go what was I thinking
well you were in a different state
you're kind of a different animal when
you're in Pursuit I think this is so
unbelievably important because it really
helps people to understand why they do
what they do and before doing the
research on you coming here today and
before understanding some of this stuff
I thought dopamine was I don't know it
was this thing that came in these hits
maybe and if I did something I got ahead
of it then I returned to Baseline if I
did something again stimulating I got
ahead of it then I returned to Baseline
but what actually is happening is I'm
doing something that's stimulating in
some way I'm getting this huge Peak then
I'm crashing below Baseline for a while
and when I'm below Baseline I'm that's
when I'm most likely to want to do
something that's going to give me a hit
again that's right and when I saw that
it reminded me of the CGI monitor the
continuous glucose monitor that I wore
because it was a very similar pattern if
I had a lot of sugar had a big peak then
I crashed below my Baseline right that's
a great observation it's the Perfect
Analogy Perfect Analogy because these
regulatory systems are all about trying
to Reg maintain homeostasis we all hear
about we learn about homeostasis like
the desire for balance the the the human
body and human physiology is actually
geared more towards something called
allostasis which involves kind of stress
modulation but without getting into too
many details you know these are Dynamic
systems meaning brain systems that are
designed to allow us to overcome
challenges if need be right this is why
I always push back on the idea that you
know stress crashes your immune system
you know what crashes your immune system
being very very stressed working a lot a
lot caretaking for someone else and then
stopping you always get sick when you
stop yeah why because actually stress
activates the immune system makes sense
that it would do that evolutionarily
right and then when we rest boom our
immune system kind of relaxes a little
bit and then we succumb to that that you
know the bacteria or virus
so what does it mean it means that we
should probably learn to modulate it's
like driving a car anytime we feel that
we're headed toward or in a peak State
we should probably kind of like lean
back off that state just a tiny bit just
a tiny bit especially if that Peak state
is coming by way of pharmacology or some
extreme circumstance just back off a
little bit maybe a lot okay so when we
do that we learn to master the
transition States between these what I'm
referring to as forward Cent of mass
flat-footed or back on my heels it's a
term I learned from a former Navy SEAL
operator he said with anything in life
you can either be back on your heels
like really challenged flat-footed kind
of like calm and and forward or forward
Center of mass like Full Tilt I think
most people would do very well to learn
to master the transition States between
waking and going to sleep right many
people can't fall asleep many people
just kind of can't turn it off you can
learn how to do that by doing things
like non-sleep deep rest some long
exhale breathing simple self-directed
zeroc cost tools that help adjust your
autonomic nervous system to be more what
we call parasympathetic more rest and
digest just long exhales might not work
the first time but over time these
become very effective tools to
self-direct the shift from forward
Center of Mass to Flat footage just kind
of laying back back on your heels and
there you go you're off to sleep when
you wake up in the morning some people
are just depleted maybe you didn't sleep
enough but learning to get forward
Center of mass shouldn't require you
know excess caffeine and stimulants and
super loud music and uh you know a
shocking text or email ideally you can
transition pretty quickly into being
forward Center of mass but not Full Tilt
forward Center of mass and why do I say
this I think for anyone who seeks to be
successful in any domain academics
business creative Endeavors whatever if
you want to have a long Arc life and a
long Arc career you really strive to
control these transition States and when
I say control all it really takes is
paying attention to them and paying
attention to the fact that yes some
people just have inherently more energy
they can do every single workout at Max
output then shower they're talking in
the gym then they're off to the some
people are like that some people like
myself if I give a 100% to Something in
the morning by the afternoon I'm a
little bit depleted so I require a 10 or
20 minute non-sleep deep rest or a nap
or just some quiet long exhale breathing
maybe a little bit of caffeine which I'm
drinking now I mean there's nothing
wrong with healthy stimulants provided
they're consumed moderation maybe an
energy drink those can be great too for
some people and then you know really
going like Full Tilt focusing one's
attention and then afterwards taking a
few moments just moments to downshift I
think we hear so much about the power of
meditation or non-sleep deep bre or ice
baths what do what do cold plunges and
cold showers do they stimulate the
release of what the catacol amines
dopamine epinephrine norepinephrine long
duration release that's why it's useful
in my opinion for all the debate about
delate cold exposure does it increase
metabolism does it not the answer seems
to be probably not much but it's
absolutely clear that it causes a huge
increase in Adrenaline dopamine and
norepinephrine that are very longlasting
and that makes you feel great especially
when you get out of the cold and I think
that's the value of it it also saves you
on your heating bill like you don't have
to have a cold plunge you take a cold
shower nobody likes it but the point is
you get out and you feel different it's
a state shift so that's great but you
don't want to do it to excess because
then you know for instance people always
say how long should I go in the cold
plung or cold shower and I say do it the
minimum amount so that you get the
effect that you're seeking which is to
be more alert and motivated I have a
friend he did 30 minutes for some reason
naked he said I did 30 minutes naked in
the coal plunge and then I got sick and
I'm feeling really low and I'm like
because you did 30 minutes I mean I
don't know about the naked part what
that had to do with it you had to throw
that in there he's kind of an extreme
guy
and I said how about 1 minute how about
30 seconds how about don't even pay
attention to the time just get in and
stay in as long as until you want to get
out and then push through that barrier
and then get out that might be a minute
might be three minutes you know protect
yourself be safe but just learn to
overcome some Challenge and then get out
you know we have this fixation that more
is better and more is not better you
want the minimal effective dose maybe a
little bit more because we don't know
where minimal is people say how many
sets in the gym is it you know now it's
like all about the volume hypertrophy or
like I've always fairly low recovery
quotient so for me I like to do a couple
warm-ups a few hard sets two or three
hard sets another exercise two or three
hard sets that's it for that muscle
group move on people always say well
volume is where it's okay great but when
I do 16 to 20 sets per week per muscle
group I'll tell you I I'm depleted it
doesn't work for me and I sort of um
well just be honest I kind of chuckle at
the exercise scientists who say well
this is the way it is in this study
great that's not how it works for me and
even though I'm a scientist and I trust
data I also trust my own experience and
no one's going to tell me that it's
Placebo because it's what's worked for
me so I think that you have to find what
your capabilities are and I do think if
you look at dog breeds of which I'm
obsessed by if you go to a dog show
which everyone should go to a dog show
once but don't watch the show go behind
the show where you see all the different
dog breeds what you'll see is what I saw
the first time I did that you have dogs
where wagging their tail all the time
they're super excited they're alert you
can see their eyes right they're just
brigh eyed you can see the Great Danes
they're super still and then my favorite
breed and the reason I own them is the
Bulldog the essence of economy of effort
they don't even lift their head off the
ground you walk over you pet them
they'll like look up at you they might
wink very still animals very powerful
but very still animals now I'm not wired
like that as you're probably getting the
impression I have a little bit more
spontaneous movement Etc so I need a lot
of mental and physical stimulation in
order to be happy in order to feel
fulfilled so for me there was a lot of
work and I still do a lot of work in
order to learn how to downshift take it
down become a good sleeper become a good
resetter reset myself during the middle
of the day with things like non-sleep
deep rest which for me has been one of
the most powerful tools or long exhale
breathing to just bring myself down
other people they tend to have a little
bit less energy than life demands of
them so they need to do a bit more cold
shower a little bit more caffeine but
then those people probably need a little
bit more rest they're like the Bulldogs
of life I think even though we're all
the same species just like dogs there's
a lot of variation there so you have to
know thyself as the Oracle said
understanding a little bit about the
catac colam means understanding that
certain things like exercise deliberate
cold
exposure stimulants like caffeine and
prescription drugs like Aderall Etc
powerfully caused the release of these
catacol amines dopamine epinephrine
norepinephrine leading to Big increases
in energy and focus but then always
always always there's a cost a trough
that follows accept that relax through
it then return to Baseline and then go
forward or avoid those things altogether
I'm not telling people what to do
obviously the prescription drug thing in
particular can be you know problematic
for some people even addictive and
certainly I'm not a fan of drugs of
abuse Like Cocaine amphetamine
absolutely categorically never done them
never
will and then other people who tend to
Veer toward you know being
hyperactivated a lot of spontaneous
movement these people tend to be a
little bit thinner a little bit leaner
or just have a ton of Natural Energy um
these people should really learn to
incorporate more kind of what I would
call calming and relaxing practices
maybe a bit more sauna than C plunge
maybe don't crank the sauna to
220 you know I find myself doing that
I'm like just relax like enjoy the sauna
and so I think the key to a good life
and a productive life is again to learn
to master the TR transition States
understand some of the biology and to
really know yourself not just your
natural tendency more Bulldog like
versus you know uh I don't know pit
bulls always have their tail going a lot
of spontaneous movement uh there other
breeds as well but also know that on any
given day you may be more or less rested
you might be more or less depleted from
life experience and kind of recognize
where you're at and figure out what's
optimal for that day in fact I forget
who the guy is he's on Instagram and
there are a lot of self-help account
then there are a lot of self-help
accounts out there but one of the best
things that um I've heard recently and I
try and incorporate in uh into my life
in fact it's in my notebook is when I
wake up in the morning I sort of take
stock of where I am in terms of how
rested I am I certainly take stock of
what I need to do that day and then I
ask what's something that I can do to
make my life that day and the life of
others better sometimes that means rest
a little bit more
sometimes that means push a little bit
more sometimes that means call a
relative that you haven't spoken to but
thinking about how to make things better
on the time scale of a day for oneself
and for others I think is what's
manageable and it's what's realistic and
it takes this whole concept of protocols
and biohacking and prescription drugs
and supplements and workouts and it and
it brings a real world perspective to it
so I think we're living in the um in the
time of kind of um almost avatars of
these different things like I think
about David goggin who I know well well
at from the perspective of cooworker
Right Where I consider him a friend but
we've never hung out outside of the work
context but I first met David back in
2016 and I'll tell you he's always that
way at least when I've interacted with
him
he's always been you know forward Center
of mass it was late in the day on a work
this was a thing in Silicon Valley was
down in San Jose um Santa Clara San Jose
area in I believe it was 2016 and we had
been working all day in this part of
this consult for this company and in the
afternoon you know there was like do we
take a break or do we push he's like no
we push we're going to do this and I
thought whoa like this guy's intense and
he was changing because he was going to
run to the airport but not run to the
airport in an Uber or drive to the
airport he meant run to the airport and
he did so you know he's forward Center
Mass he clearly has the energy or he's
found the energy can you train that can
you raise your sort of Baseline dopamine
level um or are they two separate
questions it's a great question I don't
know that we have the answer I think you
can if you become more economical about
whatever dopamine or other
neurochemicals you happen to Harbor
inside we know there's a lot of genetic
and individual variation to these things
you know there's a joke among parents
right like how they come out is how they
stay like the the Mellow kid the Mellow
baby that didn't cry much the happy baby
Remains the happy person you know there
are circumstances that can alter that
versus the fussy baby that's always
fussy as even as an adult you know
parents talk this way but parents say
all sorts of things um but you know I
know people for instance like Rick Rubin
for for instance who
is very high energy but very calm it's
part of Rick's magic he knows how to
regulate and control his energy he has
this uncanny capacity to get near things
in particular um art music and to
experience them really feel them but not
get absorbed by it not feel at least to
my my knowledge depleted by it some
people get kind of absorbed by things
and then depleted is this like the
introvert extrovert conversation as well
because two people can be in the same
room and I I mean I'm I consider myself
to be a bit of an extrovert sorry
introvert where if I stand in a room for
two to three hours doing small talk I I
the way I describe it it's like my brain
feels fried mhm whereas my assistant
Sophie it's like you've poured fuel into
her yeah I I similar to you and um I
have an ex-girlfriend Who Loved parties
she would just get so much energy from
parties and I like certain parties but I
like the the small conversation I might
have at a party is um so that resonates
with me I think we can
shift well to answer the introvert
extrovert
question I do think that some people get
energy from social interactions other
people less so but I know people who are
quite quiet who like social interactions
they're just more an observer in those
interactions as opposed to a participant
the introvert extrovert thing also at
least my understanding of the science is
that it depends a bit on how quickly you
fill up with social engagement like I I
like a good party but after a couple
hours I'm like done you know and other
people they can just go go go go go go
they get more energy from it I think you
know we think of goggin as kind of an
iconic example because he is of somebody
who is capable of pushing himself
regardless of what the internal
narratives might might be that's my
sense having spoken to him about it on
my podcast and observed him on social
media and other podcasts some people
like jao willink embody the don't even
think about it you do it because it's
4:30 in the morning and at 4:30 in the
morning you work out like don't think do
um whereas when I think of David I think
of many things but in particular about
overcoming the voice in the mind that's
trying to pull you down and defeating
that in fact having multiple
representations of Self in the brain
which is a fascinating thing unto itself
and then when I think about Rick I think
you know Rick is I iconic in my mind for
his sense of creativity his ability to
sense what is truly new and unique he
has incredible taste right to really be
able to sense like this is new and
different and exciting and he seems to
understand without trying to seek what
people are going to like what people
inevitably love so that's his one of his
many superpowers and everyone has their
superpower those are just so extremes I
think of Lex Friedman as somebody who is
so thoughtful and I mean I don't think
people really understand just how hard
Lex thinks about the tragedies of the
world the darkness in the world but also
the love that's in the world I mean he
really like hyper affiliates with what's
happening in his mind and he's able to
really like absorb himself in that and
you can feel like his his like he gets
right up next to the fire like right up
next to these things and I think he
represents the kind of iconic example of
an explorer who will look anywhere even
if people are going to give him a hard
time for it but I think mostly people
celebrate him for it you know so I think
you know different people have different
lens lenses on life and different
capacities I think if one wants to
increase their Baseline level of
dopamine I think it's important to
regulate those Peaks and troughs I'm not
a believer in like never having Peaks
and dopamine a great wedding party like
I've been to some weddings where we just
like partied all night or great concerts
I'm actually a huge fan it's kind of a a
genre of music I don't know much about
but I've always loved that band James do
you know the band we are James oh it's
so good okay I'm gonna lose Punk points
for saying this but best live shows ever
just the best live shows I've ever seen
and I know there are and I and I know
there are a lot of different ideas about
best live shows based on genres of music
I just it's like the best party you've
ever been to and I get a lift in energy
that lasts two three days from that I
don't consume any substances at those
shows they happen very seldom but when
I've gone for two or three days I feel
like a changed person it's a marked
shift in neurochemical state and I don't
feel a trough afterwards so I want to be
very clear there's certain things like
celebrations con
they seem to give us these big surges in
neurochemicals but they don't leave us
depleted and I'm very intrigued by these
experiences because when I look to some
examples I have some friends who've been
very successful in the tech sector and
finance sector they make a lot of money
and I always worry about them afterwards
inevitably they end up depressed not
knowing what they want to do so I always
encourage them to keep working in fact
the happiest people in Tech and finance
are the ones that keep working even
after they get rich
so the people I see who are very happy
are the people who take stock of their
natural levels of energy curiosity
motivation you know we could say
dopamine but that's kind of a surrogate
for a bunch of other things and it's
incomplete right there are other
chemicals involved but for sake of
conversation we could say dopamine
catamin epinephrine and they sort of
know what they're capable of on a
consistent basis I think one of the best
pieces of advice that I ever got was
from a neurologist by the name of bob
Knight when I was a graduate student he
said figure out how much work you can do
over the course of the next four to five
years on a consistent basis because it's
going to change as you get older might
not even go down so for instance I know
that I can work a good solid 12 hours a
day that's me 12 hours a day five maybe
six days a week but I like one full day
off per week I I just like that
typically it's Sunday for me I'll do
some exercise and some other things but
if I try and go 15 hours a day or 12
hours a day seven days a week I'm going
to run a ground for other people they
need to work less and now some people
will say okay but do you have kids and
this and that I'm not saying what work
means it could be career it could be
family or both but I'm not somebody who
has an infinite amount of energy but I
have a lot of energy if you have less
energy you can do things like try and
get great sleep try and eat as well as
you possibly can you may have to do more
to get more energy but sort of have to
accept your own um kind of basic line
State and I think I certainly know many
people who are like mellower calmer have
quote unquote less energy they're just
more efficient with that energy they
place it correctly they're not wasting
their energy I know people that can
scroll Instagram all the time talk about
what's going on on Twitter watch three
podcasts program and do a million things
and like they're fine so I think we have
to know where our groove is and that we
can deviate from that about 15 to 20%
but anything more stream than that we're
going to end up in trouble I think a lot
of the reason why people are curious
about dopamine is because ultimately
they want to be more productive or
effective at some goal they have in
their life so it might be building a
business it could be some it could be a
podcast whatever so taking everything
you know about dopamine and how it works
if you were giving me advice on how I
could be a better entrepreneur podcaster
whatever um the first thing I got from
you was really about this idea of
transitioning between states and also
allowing time for my reserves to
replenish after a high dopamine activity
MH um is there anything else that I
should be thinking about yeah so we
could um operationalize this in a very
clear way get enough sleep for you for
some people it's six hours for some
people it's eight hours I'd like to
dispel the myth even though my friend
Matt Walker will probably get upset at
me for saying this not everyone needs
eight or nine hours of sleep okay I got
six last night okay I actually went to
bed at midnight last night oh excuse me
I got 6 hours and 45 minutes last night
I went to bed at midnight which is kind
of late for me woke up at
6:45 but get enough sleep if you wake up
in the morning and you can't get more
sleep for whatever reason can't fall
back asleep or you have to get out of
bed if you do not feel rested I
recommend doing a 10 or 20 minute
non-sleep deep rest or yoga NRA protocol
they are available zero cost on YouTube
you could put nsdr my name if you want
to listen to me do one you could put
nsdr Kelly boy does wonderful yoga nras
she has a very pleasant voice if you
prefer a female voice there's some
wonderful yoga nras by a woman named
commy Desai anyway these are all zeroc
cost scripts that are available on
YouTube what is that so um so non-sleep
deep bre simar you did one today I did
one today on the way here okay yeah
here's what we know it does replenishes
Baseline levels of dopamine in the basil
ganglia prepares you for Action both
mental and physical action can indeed
help offset some of the sleep that maybe
you didn't get but you needed we know
that the brain goes into a kind of
pseudo sleep in this state and there's
also some evidence that Yoga Nidra and
similar practices can improve rates of
learning okay so that's sort of the the
benefits what is it it involves what
most people will call meditation but
it's different than meditation you lie
down you could do it SE seated as well
but you lie down eyes closed and you do
long exhale
breathing when we exhale we actually
slow our heart rate down I could talk
about how this is it this is through
respiratory sinus arhythmia this is a
relationship between the vagus nerve and
the beating of the heart but in any case
when we inhale our heart actually speeds
up its beats slightly and when we exhale
it slows down its beats slightly so it
involves a lot of long exhale breathing
it involves a body scan where you
deliberately relax different aspects of
your body so first your feet then your
legs then your hands it's sort of a body
scan of sorts with long exhale breathing
and it takes you into a state that's
pseudo sleep you're somewhere between
sleep and awake now the beauty of nsdr
and Yoga Nidra is that part of the
instruction at the beginning is to stay
awake now if you fall asleep it's okay
just make sure you set an alarm if you
have to go to work or do something else
but by staying awake while being very
relaxed it seems that the nervous system
can continue to stay in a sleep-like
state enough that you replenish some of
these neurochemicals that prepare you
for cognitive and physical action now
there are 10-minute ndrs there are 20-
minute ndrs there are even hourlong yoga
nras and things of that sort so it
depends on how much time you have before
you need to get up so if you sleep well
the night before you wake up after 6
eight hours and you're ready to go boom
go but if you're not I highly recommend
doing a 10 20 or 30 minute nstr practice
you will find that you will be far more
rested you will feel far more mentally
and physically vigorous when you emerge
from that it's remarkable and Matt
Walker's laboratory and I are gearing up
to do some studies on this to figure out
exactly what's happening is the brain
really going into sleep or is it
something you know entirely different we
don't quite know yet in any event it
most certainly works and soon we'll know
the exact mechanism in the brain but
this dopamine re but this reupping of
dopamine is very very clear from the
existing
studies so what are you doing there
you're essentially filling the reservoir
for the day of activities okay then I
recommend hydration which has a profound
effect on energy levels so 16 to 32
ounces of
water people debate drink out of plastic
or don't drink out of plastic do you
have to purify your water Etc you know
listen it depends on budget and interest
and level of paranoia I drink a filtered
water I tend to drink out of ceramic or
glass but I am somebody who will
occasionally drink out of a plastic
water bottle I'm I'm not neurotic about
that sort of thing but look if you are
fine and we could all do well to limit
the amount of plastic was in the oceans
so there you
go
hydrate then some people like myself do
very well to get some exercise and
sunlight ideally simultaneously but
certainly get some
sunlight and exercise prior to caffeine
some people do some people don't okay I
also understand and totally support
people who just want their coffee or tea
first thing in the morning there's no
rule that says that you can't do that
but for me what I would do is I'd get up
use the restroom if you need to hydrate
and then get some bright light in your
eyes ideally from sunlight first thing
in the morning why well there's a whole
story about circadian biology here that
I could tell you but I've done that many
times before suffice to say that getting
bright light ideally from sunlight in
your eyes even through cloud cover so if
you're in the UK even through cloud
cover increases the amount of cortisol
release in your brain and body
markedly that is a good healthy increase
in cortisol that is associ iated with
the transition to waking up so we know
that bright light in the morning
especially from sunlight increases
daytime mood focus and alertness and it
will improve your sleep later that night
can I ask then because I woke up in a
hotel this morning and because of you I
now think about sunlight a lot so I woke
up and I have a balcony in the hotel but
I can't see the sun because the sun is
on the other side of the hotel right so
you're west facing in the morning and
it's coming up in the East so here's the
ideal circumstance you go outside you
take your sunglasses off eyeglasses in
contact are fine even if they have UV
protection you face East it's a clear
morning the sun is there maybe it's even
Rising across the Horizon and you watch
it for 5 10 minutes and then you go back
inside and carry about your day here's
the realistic situation you wake up
you're in a hotel or an apartment you've
got things to do your phone is on Etc
what do you do get out onto the balcony
get some natural light the ambient light
as we say is still far brighter outside
even on an overcast day than it would be
indoors with the brightest possible
overhead lights now there are Seasonal
effective disorder lights so-called sad
lights that are designed to generate
10,000 lucks or more and simulate
sunlight there is really no simulation
for sunlight but those special lights
are a special circumstance here's what I
know for sure and everyone will agree
that it's much brighter outside even on
an overcast morning than it is at night
okay you can see even on an overcast day
typically without a flashlight that
tells you there's a lot of photons a lot
of light energy outside so the best
thing to do is just get outside
especially on overcast days and get some
ambient light in your eyes when I say
view morning sunlight as soon as
possible after waking up two questions
always emerge first is what happens if I
wake up before the sun comes out well
listen unless you have powers that I'm
not aware of you're going to have to
wait for the sun to come out okay I just
don't have any way to make it rise any
faster for you so and if you do please
like email me and let me know how that's
done but the point here is that on an
overcast day or even if you're not
looking in the direction that the sun
happens to be rising you're still
getting sunlight the photon energy is
what arrives at your eyes eventually
triggers activation of cells in the
neural retina this pie crust like tissue
that lines the back of your eyes and
signals to your brain it's time to wake
up so when I say view morning sunlight a
lot of people think they need to see the
sunrise across the sunset I don't mean
you need to see the Sun as an object you
need to see the light emitting from the
Sun and even on overcast days that there
now on a densely overcast day in the
thick of winter in the UK or Scandinavia
it can be quite dark even in the morning
and throughout the day in that case
you'll really want to strive to get some
bright artificial light exposure in the
morning and throughout the day as well
but this business of getting sunlight we
can put light in capital letters not
necessarily seeing the Sun as an object
but getting sunlight in your eyes early
in the day increases that cortisol Peak
and its duration this is great for your
immune system it great for alertness
and when we hear cortisol normally
people think bad oh cortisol is bad no
cortisol is terrific you need cortisol
trust me people who have deficits in
cortisol production or regulation have
all sorts of problems we're talking
about getting a healthy big increase in
cortisol early in the day that carries
your energy until the evening and then
the cortisol drops off what about shift
workers shift workers God bless them
they're essential for so much of what we
do and consume and need so we have to be
grateful to them they fortunately are in
a very compromised Health State often
they have digestive issues mood issues
it's a real problem and it's very
dependent on the particular shift the
worst case scenario for them is the
swing shift where they're working days
then they're working nights on the order
of you know three days on three days off
Etc it's terrible we know that Health
outcomes for shift workers are so much
worse we know that a few things can help
for instance regular meal and exercise
times okay we know that red light and
here I'm not talking about red light
therapy I'm talking about working under
lights that are a bit more um red
shifted long wavelength shifted as we
say as opposed to bright fluorescent
lights can help reduce some of the
cortisol release associated with shift
work that occurs at the wrong times this
is a pretty nuanced topic um that again
depends on the shift um ideally one
doesn't work shifts their entire life if
you absolutely have to do shift work go
to your boss tell them I said this try
and stay on the same schedule even if
it's a nocturnal schedule which is the
most unhealthy schedule try and stay on
the same schedule for at least two weeks
before shifting back to another schedule
if you're somebody who's required to
stay up until 3: in the morning and then
sleep until 11:00 a.m. does that mean
that viewing morning sunlight your
morning at 11:30 a.m. is not useful no
it's still useful try and keep things as
regular as possible that's my advice but
for people who are on a typical what we
call dial daytime active as opposed to
nocturnal nighttime active
schedule this business of hydration
sunlight movement even if it's skipping
rope for five minutes or jogging in
place or just swinging one's arms or
getting a little walk in in the morning
immensely
beneficial if you can do a full workout
first thing in the morning great if you
don't have time for that until later in
the day I'll be the first to say
exercise when you can do it consistently
so if you know don't think that if you
don't work out in the morning that you
shouldn't do it later we know everybody
for sake of longevity and immediate I
guess what we call Health span and
lifespan and well-being for that matter
should be doing at least two or three
days per week of resistance training of
some sort is true for men women and
cardiovascular training in order to
ensure healthy neuromuscular connections
brain health heart health this is just
very very clear if you do that early in
the day fine if you do that on your
lunch hour fine if you do that in the
evening fine just make sure whatever you
do in order to get that P workout
whatever caffeine or pre-workout that
you're taking doesn't inhibit your
ability to get a great night's sleep
because sleep is the ultimate
restorative it's what really is the
foundation of mental health and physical
health and I can say if you want to be
because this question started off what
can you do to be you know have the best
dopamine system the best energy the best
creativity As you move through your day
notice your energy levels
eat well certainly I believe that people
should eat mostly nonprocessed or
minimally processed foods that's very
clear regardless of whether or not
you're vegan vegetarian omnivore or
carnivore and eat amounts and foods that
allow you to have sufficient mental
energy so for me that largely means high
quality protein and fibrous vegetables
and fruit throughout the day what's your
Vice any carbohydrate with melted
parmesan cheese so thin crust pizza
pasta with with parmesan cheesee
especially if there's like a Diet Coke
nearby or oh goodness I can just consume
consume consume it just very hard for me
to hit my threshold with those things
this is a slight tangent but I will
return to this dopamine conversation
it's it's it's related but when you have
that thin crust pizza or that whatever
food that spikes your dopamine for me I
got a bit of a sweet tooth so that's my
advice carrot cake or something like
that oh yeah carrot cake is good
especially if the ratio of Theo of the
frosting to the Cake part is set right
it's too much Frost or too much cake
yeah exactly um no go but if it's just
the right ratio so if I I had that
carrot cake yesterday which no one knows
about I kept it to myself but does that
mean that I'm more likely with the
understanding of dopamine to want carrot
cake again tomorrow the day after
because I've got into a bit of a carrot
cake cycle because I think everybody
when they think about their relationship
with sugar understands that if they just
laid off sugar for like three or four
weeks the craving seemed to die down
yeah it's an interesting question I
don't think we have the exact cancer
some would argue that we should have
more of a kind of balanced relationship
with food whereby if we really crave
something that we should allow ourselves
it provided it's not some addictive
substance or something you don't addicts
relapsing um here we're talking about
food we're not talking about drugs of
abuse Etc um but is food not addictive
in the same way well food can be very
compulsive I think some people are
addicted to food um I you know I Define
addiction as a progressive narrowing of
the things that bring you pleasure we
could probably attach to that you know
the classic definition of addiction is
where continued consumption or um
engagement in a given activity is
actually maladapted for your life right
I mean if you have four pieces of carrot
cake this week I doubt given the shape
that you're in it's going to shorten
your life you might not feel great but
it's not going to shorten your life
you're certainly not going to like lose
your income um like somebody who's a
gambling addict would um this kind of
thing you're not going to throw your
life away or go rob somebody in order to
get that carrot cake although but but is
it doing that that and I'm pointing now
at the dopamine wave thing am I having a
dopamine crash you are and Anna lmy
describes this best um and you can do
this experiment it's kind of a fun
experiment for you chocolate lovers
abstain from chocolate for say a week
and then pick your favorite chocolate
and take a little piece of that
chocolate and put it in your mouth and
taste it and of course it will taste
delicious it'll taste wonderful but if
you notice very quickly your brain
shifts to a sense of wanting more not so
much savoring the chocolate that you're
eating but wanting more and you're
thinking about well how much am I going
to take I'm going take this Square oh
that other Square next to it broke off a
little bit guess I got to eat that one
too so that's the dopamine system in
action and then what happens is you eat
half the chocolate thing and you go oh I
don't feel that good about it but I kind
of want more anyway why well you're in
that dopamine trough the same amount of
something is giving you diminishing
returns what's the way to make that
chocolate take taste absolutely
fantastic again abstain now there's also
an interesting phenomenon and this is
why I said I can't be exactly sure how
to answer your question accurately that
is I have several friends just by way of
example who reached their 40s quite
overweight 50s quite overweight 30 to 60
pounds overweight and they'd come to me
and they'd say I want to lose weight
every single one of them has been highly
successful in rapidly losing that weight
and keeping it off the following way and
I'm not a nutritionist I say you can eat
meat fish eggs chicken fruit and
vegetables and that's it and drink water
and caffeine and don't consume calories
and Beverages and every single one of
them lost 30 60 pounds and has kept it
off now Lane Norton and I who are
friends and colleagues in the health
space he'll say well they created a
caloric deficit and so they lost weight
I'd say absolutely I would also say and
I think Lane would probably agree
although there's no randomized control
trial to prove this that in eating that
way mostly whole unprocessed or
minimally processed
foods they did several things as well
one is you start to learn the
relationship between how something
tastes its caloric value its
micronutrient and macronutrient value
what do I mean when you eat a steak like
let's say a 12 ounce Ribeye if that's in
your nutrition plan meaning you allow
yourself red meat let's say you eat that
you taste it it's very Savory hopefully
it tastes really good if it's cooked
properly it's a great cut and your brain
learns the relationship between steak
and calories and nutrients and amino
acids there's this whole amino acid
forging hypothesis of nutrition then you
eat fruit you taste the fruit you
actually taste it now this is Far and
Away different than if you're consuming
hogy sandwiches and hamburgers and
cheeseburgers there's something about
removing the bread there's something
about removing removing the pasta
there's something about removing those
foods that I believe has nothing to do
with those Foods being bad in fact I
love bread and pasta high quality bread
and pasta and I do consume those but I'm
not trying to lose weight nor gain
weight when people eat that way meat
fish eggs chicken fruits and vegetables
and nothing else for a couple of months
what every single one of them says is
well then we had this party and you know
the kids were having birthday cake so I
decided to allow myself a slice of cake
they ate it and it tastes did disgusting
to them or they in some cases threw up
or they just felt like it was gross
whatever positive Association they had
with it before it no longer
exists and then they get right back on
their let's call it diet and they
continue along their way and they're
very relieved to learn that they
actually enjoy healthy foods I think
that we can rewire in fact we know that
you can rewire your association between
nutritive value Taste of food calories
and micronutrients and so when I hear
about these highly restrictive
elimination diets where people do only
meat which frankly does not seem healthy
to me I think some Fiber from other
sources is good although I'm sure Paul
saladino will come after me probably
with a drumstick or something Jord or
Jord whatever Jordan's doing seems to be
working for Jordan so I'm not goingon to
argue people should do as they will but
you know um I'm an omnivore and enjoy
that but I think when people do
elimination type diets the more
important thing is that they're learning
this association between taste and
calories that seems to really work for
them and the pleasure of eating certain
foods and really dropping into the the
quality and the taste of that food When
We crave a food and it's kind of an
Indulgence food like chocolate or carrot
cake or something it's more along this
dopamine uh transition from Peak to
trough now when I I love steak my dad's
Argentine I'm half Argentine so I love a
great beef chizo or like a you know like
I love red meat but I don't eat two ribe
eyes I eat one and I'm good and so I
think that there's something very sading
about high nutritive quality food that
includes fruits and vegetables and the
vegans have their choices and the
vegetarians have their choices and so so
much of what we think about when we
think about dopamine and food is yes
highly processed foods candy packaged
Goods cookies chips they drive this
craving for more but people don't
actually enjoy them that much they just
require them or at least they think they
require them so I encourage anyone who
feels addicted to those foods to take a
you know healthy approach you know
consume enough calories don't go on a
crash diet but try eating really high
quality unprocessed or minimally
processed foods for just a couple of
weeks at first it's murder they just
can't do it and then inevitably they
call me and they say I feel so much
better and I don't even want that stuff
anymore it's interesting how that then
correlates with your own motivation and
I it's we fly out here to do this
podcast and we come out sometimes for
two weeks three weeks sometimes even
four weeks weeks and we all eat the same
thing pretty much throughout the day for
those four weeks so it's almost a
dietary intervention for me because when
we finish recording my food is going to
be there and I know what it's going to
be it's going to be basically a salad
with meat in it certain vegetables Etc
and so it becomes this like intervention
going to La is this dietary intervention
what happens is when I come here and
have that salad every day with various
different meats and various different
vegetables every day is my motivation to
go to the gym for some reason improves
MH my sleep end up improving and it's
like my that one sort of dietary
intervention has this really Downstream
impact on everything else I get in the I
get in the best shape of my life I'm
motivated I feel good I drive along it
might also be the sunshine out here but
and I just I I think people don't
realize that even as you say a week or
two having that dietary intervention
intervention cutting out the crap can
have such a big reframing on your
perception of food how you experience it
and now I'm excited about the bloody
salad yeah it's wild how healthy foods
become more attractive us the more we
consume them and the more we avoid
unhealthy Foods I think also a lot of
people don't know how great you can feel
getting some morning sunlike great sleep
eating nutritious food and once they do
once they experience that lift and
energy and mood it's kind of addictive
in its own right now I also think it's
important to not be too restrictive
right you know around the holidays or
something I I mean I love a great slice
of pie like I do these things I think if
one gets enough movement then you're
fine um you know if nothing else this
whole um kind of trend toward the use of
these glp1 glucagonlike peptide Agonist
like OIC and monjaro if it's taught us
anything it's that people are obese
because they consume too many calories
they just ingest too much relative to
their activity levels and here in
particular in the United States people
are walking and moving far less most
people get no regular exercise and they
consume about 3,500 calories per day on
average so they're just on a steady
weight increase for most of their life
more activity less food intake is fairly
easy to accomplish if you do just a few
subtle things so there are these levers
these major levers like eating better as
you said meat and salads I mean it's one
of the most satiating meals you can have
I also find that if I consume fewer
carbohydrates during the day this is
just me it runs countercurrent to most
everything you'll read out there but I
like to fast essentially until about 11
or noon just cuz I'm not hungry I like
to exercise in the morning but then I'll
have a lunch that is some meat some
salad maybe starch like a bowl of
oatmeal or rice but not a whole lot and
then toward evening my final meal you
know dinner which is around 7 or 8:00
p.m. generally includes a few more
starches and a little less protein and I
sleep best that way some people it's the
opposite they like a big bowl of oatmeal
and just a couple of eggs in the morning
and you know and some nuts in the
afternoon and then they like a big steak
for dinner you know I think everybody's
slightly different some people are just
naturally have more energy I think about
Joo willink I mean the guy has so much
energy and I think it's not a
coincidence that he works out at 4:30 in
the morning I think that if you work out
early in the day you often have more
energy throughout the day I find if I
get my workout done before 9:00 a.m. I
have more energy all day long however if
I work out mid morning late morning
pretty sleepy in the afternoon
everybody's different is there like a
physiological rationale for that there
probably is you know as our body
temperature rises in the morning we are
waking up so when we exercise we
accelerate that transition toward being
more alert now in the afternoon when our
body temperature typically Peaks after
that is usually when we get a bit sleepy
typically after lunch people get sleepy
sometimes because of the volume of food
they they've eaten most often it's
because they've hit that temperature
peak in the early afternoon and we know
that as body temperature drops 1 to 3
degrees in the evening and night time
that's when we fall asleep in fact in
order to fall asleep your body
temperature actually has to drop by
about 1 to 3 this is why you know
sticking a foot out of the you know the
comforter or if you have a cooling
mattress which some people require
because they run hot or keeping the room
cool facilitates falling asleep although
it's not completely the case so I should
mention the best scenario would be cool
room with warm blankets to fall asleep
and then toward morning sort of a warmer
environment we actually get a little bit
more rapid eye movement sleep dream
sleep elaborate dream sleep toward
morning so you can get really nuanced in
this stuff all the biohackers know this
but you know basically if you work out
early in the day you know before 8 or
9:00 a.m. it's going to accelerate that
increase in body temperature and you'll
feel more alert there's also this
beautiful phenomenon in circadian
biology called entrainment whereby let's
say you're not a morning person you hate
mornings if you force yourself to get up
and exercise at say 6: a.m. for three
days in a row by the fourth day you'll
naturally start waking up around that
time because the circadian clock of the
brain we call the supermatic nucleus the
main inputs that drive when you're alert
and when you want to be asleep are
sunlight exposure to the eyes this is
the whole basis for that morning
sunlight exposure physical activity when
you eat and social engagement and there
could be a whole discussion about this
but suffice to say that if you start
getting some Morning Light some exercise
maybe even before the sun comes out some
caffeine hydration and then a meal in
the early part of the day your body will
start to anticipate all of those
activities and even if you're a
so-called Night Owl you'll start to
shift your clock toward being an early
riser and lo and behold around 10 or
11:00 p.m. you'll start to notice you're
getting sleepy and you just have to have
the discipline to turn off the phone put
in the other room and go to sleep I I
wonder that I do wonder if I'm a night
hour because of bad habits or because of
some kind of
biology typically people fall into one
of three categories and it is
genetically determined of you can be a
morning person a more typical would be
somebody who goes to sleep somewhere
between 10:30 and midnight wakes up
between 6:00 and 8:00 a.m. and then the
night owls who like to stay up till 1:
or 2 in the morning wake up around you
know 10: or 11:00 a.m. it changes with
age I'm a bit of a weirdo in the sense
that I like to do most of my mental and
physical work between 6:00 a.m. and noon
then I'm not super effective in the
afternoon my brain doesn't work so well
I can take care of some little things
unless I offset that and then between
6:00 p.m and midnight I'm alert
again I don't know maybe it's my
Argentine Roots who knows so so given
it's the afternoon now and I knew that
we were going to be podcasting what I
did is I did indeed get up at 6:45 a.m.
I did a bunch of work this morning for
the podcast some other things and then
on the way here I did a non-sleep deep
rest I listened to that for about 10
minutes I kind of sensed I was somewhere
in sleep I don't quite recall and then
when we arrived I'm a little bit groggy
a little bit of hydration a little bit
of caffeine and I feel completely alert
so you can learn to offset these troughs
and energy I think that at every stage
of life
meaning for every 5-year block of life
you can kind of predict what the best
schedule for you would be so when you're
a baby you slept all the time that's
your best schedule when you were an
adolescent it was different I have a
niece she's 17 and I went and stayed
with my sister recently and it was
unbelievable she went to bed at 10:30 at
night probably fell asleep at midnight
because she was on her iPad with her
friends she would wake up the next day
at noon it's summertime get up say hello
get a glass of water go back to sleep
and sleep for another hour and that's
exactly what she should be doing why
because she's growing right she's a
she's youth in youth in your 30s it
might be a different schedule in your
40s a different schedule and then of
course kids come along and they force
the schedule so I would say whatever
stage of life you're in you probably
know what the best schedule is for you
and you just have to work with the
realities of life but if you can adhere
to that knowing okay you have a peak in
energy in focus at this hour or peeking
energy in focus at that hour by all
means do it I mean Rick Ruben shared um
when he came on my podcast that his best
day is to transition slowly into the day
take a walk outside in the sun in the
morning slowly into the day and then he
does his work really his main focused
work in the afternoon and in the evening
some people are more night shifted some
people are more morning shifted I tend
to get my best ideas I think right
before I go to sleep which is annoying
because there's this temptation to go to
my laptop and begin writing and begin
working do you write them
down yes yeah I write down little cues
and then team will know because it's
useful when I'm on this time frame
because my team in the UK are getting my
my memos at 7 a.m. there right but they
don't know that I'm it's like midnight
or 1: a.m. here I'm so glad you
mentioned this I think for people who
are interested in having a great life a
great career it's very important to have
a mode of capture so for me um it's this
notebook and it's not just blank pages
in front of me I promise these are just
like little little things that come to
mind um it doesn't matter what's here
um and I place them into the notebook
and then at the end of each week or so
or if I'm on a plane I'll start to look
back and see you know what are the ideas
that feel sticky like oh there's
something there there's like a concept
there I'm actually thinking about doing
a a a drawing book to teach neuroscience
at some point I'm also very interested
in animals so I was listing out this is
very um embarrassing but the different
animals that I feel I embodied at
different stages of my life and where
I'm at now because of the different
energies and is very personal right like
the sense that it's not going to mean
much in the kind of classic Neuroscience
sense but I think having a mode of
capture for these thoughts that
spontaneously arise out of our
unconscious mind I mean that's what's
happening when you're falling asleep
your conscious mind which is involved in
thinking and planning and organizing
knowledge is starting to Tire those
prefrontal cortex circuits are starting
to tire and your unconscious mind which
is the main driver of all your ideas and
so much of what you you are about as an
individual are starting to geyser to the
surface this is why in
dreams even though it occurs in symbols
we are playing with different ideas and
ordering of different ideas this is not
Freudian okay this is not just yungi and
psychology we had an expert in this you
know Dr Paul kti did a mental health
series on our podcast and he said you
know the bulk of your brain activity
besides the stuff that's just regulating
breathing and heart rate and digestion
Etc is really devoted to this
unconscious processing it's taking
events from your childhood plans that
you have that you don't even
know yet that aren't aware of yet
experiences that are happening today and
and looking at those from different
perspectives and offering those to you
in in what in dreams what are dreams in
stories in narratives that are really
disrupted in space and time A lot can
happen in a short period of time then
you're in a different room dreams are
very distorted in terms of their
representation but when you're falling
asleep you're in that pseudo awake state
obviously where you're thinking planning
and action parts of your brain your
logical mind is turned off and these
ideas are geysering to the surface and
this is why sometimes people have their
best ideas in the shower while walking
when they're not trying to have ideas
and you can seeed this by writing down a
few things before you go to sleep you
can think you know like wondering what
to do next
year don't know okay maybe it's that
vague does that mean you'll have a dream
that solves it that night maybe probably
not but chances are if you pay attention
to you know during the day you'll be
walking along or for some reason this
always happens to me when I'm um uh
urinating I don't know why I don't know
why like I go like I don't know maybe
it's because I'm relaxed like I go
especially if I'm in nature and I'm
hiking I'll go like take a take a pee
behind a tree and I I be like oh I have
an idea I don't know why it is I think
it's because I'm not thinking about
doing anything except you know I'm
taking a leak behind a tree I guess this
is very forthcoming for me to admit this
but you know some people stay in the
shower other people while they're
running one thing that I think is really
use useful for coming up with ideas I
seem to be mentioning Rick a lot today
but um one thing I observed when I spent
time with Rick is he has a kind of a
practice although he's never said this
formally where he'll be very still with
his eyes closed and I thought maybe he's
meditating maybe he's um sleeping and it
turns out he told me that his mind is
very active in that time even though his
body is very still now that sparked
something in me because I have a guest
or had a guest on my podcast by the name
of Carl diero he's one of The Luminaries
in the field of Neuroscience and one of
the best bioengineers in the world he's
also a psychiatrist a brilliant guy and
when he came on my podcast he said that
he has a practice every night after he
puts his five kids to sleep he's one of
these hyperproductive people where he
sits down and He makes himself stay as
completely still as possible and forces
himself to think in complete sentences
and I thought this is interesting
because it was also reported or
purported that Einstein would take walks
and then occasionally just
stop and let his mind continue in
thinking while he stopped his body and
when you start looking back through
history of Science History of Music Etc
you'll find that there are these hyper
creative hyperproductive people that
have a practice of making their body
completely still and their mind very
active not meditation where you're
trying to just focus on your breathing
but they're actually actively thinking
while keeping their body very still now
I find that fascinating I also find it
fascinating that some people for
instance myself if I take a long run
which I do every Sunday I make it a
point to run for 60 to 90 minutes every
Sunday not fast but I just go go go go
go inevitably during those runs I come
up with some of my best ideas it's a it
puts my brain into a state where I can
things geyser up from my unconscious
mind and so that state of mind is one in
which the body is very active and I'm
not trying to think about anything so
you have these two inverse States one is
body still mind active the other is body
active mind kind of freerunning kind of
just like spooling out when I'm running
I'm not thinking about anything and then
ideas spring to the surface in the
Neuroscience of creativity we know that
there's a meditation practice that's
been studied called open monitoring
meditation most typical meditation is
you sit or lie down close your eyes
maybe Lotus position maybe not and you
concentrate on your breathing you bring
your attention constantly back to your
third eye center work from Wendy
Suzuki's laboratory at NYU has shown
just 10 to 13 minutes of that practice
every day can improve memory in
particular working memory which is your
ability to keep thoughts online lower
stress and other benefits there's a
different form of meditation which is
open monitoring meditation where you sit
or lie down close your eyes and you
actually are paying attention to
everything around you you focus your
attention there in the room there in the
room there in the room or you just let
it all all just kind of sift over you
you're not actually focusing on your
breathing and that practice of open
monitoring meditation is associated with
improved creative capacity now improved
creative capacity in air quotes is
something that's measured in a
laboratory so synthesis of new ideas
Creative Solutions to a puzzle Etc we're
not talking about writing great works of
music but in a laboratory you only have
so many things that you can sample or
measure typically in undergraduate
students so I I'm kind of just you know
talk ing all of this out there as a
means for people you who are interested
in improving their creativity or
exploring creativity to not just wait
not just wait have a mode of capture
write things down or maybe jot them into
your phone or voice memos maybe do open
monitoring meditation maybe sit and
force yourself to think in complete
sentences with your body still maybe go
for a long run or walk where you're
bored you're not listening to anything
and see what comes up I think everyone
does this differently but if you're able
to access the state of mind it can be
immens powerful because great ideas come
to
you so movement was the last one in the
dopamine we were doing this nice
dopamine like tree of things sleep we
did the um nsdr nonsleep deep breast we
did the hydration exercise sunlight if
I'm trying to use what I understand now
about dopamine to be productive in my
relationships but also in my
professional life is there anything else
I need to be think we also did food and
you can spike your dopamine and
epinephrine nor epinephrine the so-call
catacol amines with a cold shower or
cold plunge it is a state shifting tool
that's really what it is I like to do
sauna and cold at least once a week most
people don't have access to a sauna if
you don't have access to a sauna no big
deal you could take a hot bath just
don't scald yourself and if you're a
male saers now because of the um someone
told me that it might fry my sperm oh
yeah let's have a very Frank discussion
about that it it won't fry them but it
will definitely um deplete the number of
viable sperms so if you are interested
in conceiving just understand that the
cycle for Genesis of sperm
spermatogenesis takes place over the
course of somewhere between 60 and 90
days depending on exactly what part of
the cycle you're referring to heat is
not good for sperm this is why testicles
exist outside the body why the scrotum
can both contract and and sort of
relax and if you go into a sauna or a
hot tub or a hot bath you will lower the
number a viable sperm that you produce
in over the course of the next 60 to 90
days so if you're trying to conceive you
probably want to avoid those
circumstances unless of course you go
into a sauna and you take a cold pack
with some insulation please and you put
it in your groin um that's a
straightforward way to maintain coolness
of the testicles and maintain sperm
while in the SAA it's not going to
permanently deplete your sperm but it
will dramatically lower sperm viable
sperm count forward motile sperm we know
this also from people that sit too much
or people that have larger legs I mean
these Studies have actually been done if
you look at the correlation between
amount of time seated especially driving
or on a hot car
seat and sperm count and viability
there's kind of an inverse relationship
there does that mean that you should
actively cool your testicles well
there's a whole culture of this on the
internet there are products that people
can buy I think they're what are they
called snowballs it's like a um I think
they're called um you know which is like
cold uh underwear or something I think
that's getting a little bit um excessive
um however there's a kind of basic
understanding that heat isn't good
excessive heat isn't good for sperm and
the whole rationale be behind coal
plunges for sake of testosterone and
sperm probably can only be substantiated
by the fact that if you get into a cold
bath or cold shower and then you warm up
you vasoconstrict so you reduce the
blood flow to the area and then you're
going to allow much more blood flow into
that area after they warm up again but
again heat is bad for the testicles so
if you're not trying to conceive no big
deal or you could bring an ice pack in
there I will also say and this is a very
important Public Service Announcement
don't think that you can use hot tub or
hot bath or sauna as
contraception I don't know that it's
that effective and um I can assure you
without having looked at the data that
uh many uh child has been conceived
despite the fact that people were in a
hot tub or bath or sauna whether or not
they were actually conceived in the
bathtub hot tub or sauna is obviously
none of my business perfect Ted has
quite frankly taken the nation by storm
a small green energy drink that you've
probably seen popping up through a Tesco
or to waitrose they've grown by almost
10,000% in a very short period of time
because people are sick and tired of the
typical unhealthy energy drinks and
they've been looking for an alternative
perfect Ted is the drink that I drink as
I'm sat here during the podcast because
it gives me increased focus it doesn't
give me crashes which sometimes might
happen if I'm having a 3 four five six
hour conversation with someone on the
podcast and it tastes amazing it's
exactly what I've been looking for in
terms of energy that's why I'm an
investor and that's why they sponsor
this podcast and for a limited time
perfect Ted have given Diary of CEO
listeners only a huge 40% off if you use
the code diary for 40 at checkout don't
tell anybody about this and you can only
get this online for a limited time so
make sure you don't miss out the other
thing that I I'm curious about as it
relates to dopamine is
pornography I think pornography has
become more readly available now than
ever before certain I can go on any
social media platform especially X and I
scroll down for long enough I will be
exposed to pornography whether I chose
to go and seek it out or not yeah it'll
find you it'll find you on pretty much
every application um so I especially
concerning for young people who are in
that those formative years but what is
your view on the on pornography dopamine
and the overall social harm of
pornography yeah so this is a
controversial topic because obviously
people have different opinions on
limiting personal freedom right um both
expression and consumption of of uh
pornography right um but moving that
aside and just focusing on things
through the lens of biology and the
dopamine system we know that
the more stimulating the more intense an
experience the greater the increase in
dopamine I mean it's very clear based on
neuroimaging studies that you know more
amphetamine causes bigger increases in
dopamine than less amphetamine more
cocaine causes bigger increases in
dopamine than less cocaine caffeine can
cause an increase in dopamine but it's
not nearly the kind of increase the peak
that is that you observe with
amphetamine or cocaine all right so we
can't just say stimulants and we can't
just say sex we can't just say
pornography we have to ask within the
domain of pornography because we know
that sexual activity and in particular
anticipation of sexual activity okay
this is important anticipation of sexual
activity raises dopamine levels then the
question is what is the range of things
and the range of dopamine increase now
while there hasn't been a very
systematic exploration of this we know
that you know a lot of pornography is
Extreme right it involves more than two
people it can involve all sorts of
dynamics that for some people are going
to be hyper stimulatory okay so this is
very different than I guess what people
would call soft pornography quote
unquote right and here these are
subjective labels so let's just pick a
hypothetical scenario a person is
viewing a lot of let's say high
intensity High dopamine for them
releasing pornography okay for some
people that might be pornography of
genre a for other people it might be
pornography of genre B for somebody who
never looks at pornography maybe it's
quite
mild but for them it's actually quite
intense in terms of the amount of
dopamine it releases now what do we know
based on dopamine Dynamics remember
dopamine is the universal currency of
motivation seeking and reward it's not
like there's dopamine unique to
pornography versus dopamine unique to
food it's just a matter of levels and
duration if somebody is consuming let's
call it very intense AKA High dopamine
releasing pornography on a regular basis
what do we know that peak in dopamine
will start to lessen it'll be lower and
lower and the trough in dopamine after
they view that pornography will be
deeper trough and longer trough meaning
they are very likely we don't know for
sure but very likely to seek out more
and more intense experiences to try and
just get them back to Baseline pretty
soon the pornography that at one time
was very stimulating for them is no
longer stimulating now the concern here
is that and let's just be frank we're
not just talking about viewing
pornography we also have to ask
ourselves what are people doing as they
view this
pornography this is a conversation that
should be had but I have to do it in a
way where I'm not imparting moral
judgment on any of it I'm not saying
people should masturbate or not
masturbate that's none of my business
frankly This is highly individual it
relates to all sorts of things in terms
of values
Etc the point is however that we know
that orgasm is a dopamine related event
and postorgasm there's a increase in a
molecule called prolactin in the brain
prolactin actually in part sets the
refractory period in which there can't
be further erection in males and orgasm
in males okay and in females it really
depends I mean there's this whole world
I mean Dr Reena mik is um far more
skilled to discuss this than I am about
you know different types of orgasms in
women Etc the extent to which multiple
orgasms can occur in some individuals
not others I think the general belief is
that it's possible in most anybody um
including males and females right but
that it's more typical in females than
in males this sort of thing here's the
point dopamine and prolactin generally
are in a kind of a push pull or seesaw
relationship where by very stimulatory
high dopamine releasing activities and
pornography and things like that
increased dopamine but repeated exposure
to that regardless of the activities
occurring during that time lead to big
long troughs in dopamine such that more
stimulation is required just to get any
sense of arousal we also know that
prolactin when that is increased tends
to create a kind of subdued lack of
dopamine I'm using these terms broadly
um kind of amotivated non-motivated
state there are reasons for this
biologically right after ejaculation the
idea is that animals won't then or
humans won't then copulate again and
again and again at least not for some
period of time the duration of the
refractory period is highly individual
it's determined by age by species
there's the so-called coolage effect are
you familiar with the coolage effect I'm
familiar with post nut Clarity okay um
slightly different there's an anecdote
that um at least to my understanding is
true at least the coolage effect is a
known thing in neuroendocrinology
whereby President Calvin kulage
reportedly was visiting a chicken farm
with his wife they were touring the farm
and there were a lot of hens and a lot
of chickens generally and the dosent who
was showing them around said you know
this rooster here pointed to a rooster
copulates more than 300 times per day
it's remarkable and miss kulage turns to
president kulage and says you hear that
300 times per day she's obviously quite
impressed and letting him know that and
kulage that is President kulage says Ah
but let me ask you a question same hen
or different hens and the dosent says
different hens now here's the phenomenon
the coolage effect it exists in rodents
it exists in chickens it exists in
dogs people can speculate whether or not
it exists in humans whereby if an animal
copulates then the male is in a
refractory period lasting anywhere from
minutes to hours to days depending on
age species Etc during that refractory
period they can't achieve erection and
or ejaculate again but if you replace
the mate with a novel mate the
refractory period is shortened
substantially why the answer is very
clear based on actual measurements of
brain dopamine why because dopamine is
also associated with novelty now the
refractory period probably serves an
important evolutionary role whereby it
improves pair bonding so that post post
ejaculation postorgasm okay here I'm
interchangeably talking about these for
males and females you know anytime you
hear ejaculation then people think males
Etc postorgasm postcoidal Bliss pair
bonding the sharing of phermones the
sharing of stories you know the sharing
of affection Right the sharing of a bed
to sleep in these things are intimately
involved in pair bonding so I'm not
saying that the refractory period is a
bad thing what I'm saying is that
dopamine can overcome the refractory
period but the refractory period itself
is largely due to an increase in
prolactin that suppresses dopamine so
let's go back all the way to this
question about
pornography what's the typical scenario
while this is not something I choose to
think about a lot you're talking about
some individual in their apartment or
home watching intense dopamine
stimulating
pornography in which they presumably are
aroused or not aroused they do or don't
do whatever they choose to do but that
over time has less and less of an effect
in getting them aroused and keep in mind
that none of this necessarily translates
to real world human safe interactions
between individuals right pornography is
very very different than real world
sexual interactions so there is a
phenomenon that is starting to surface
on the internet what I mean by that I
mean there are a lot of questions posed
in podcast forums in meaning in the
comment section on YouTube about is
pornography dangerous is it bad Etc I
think the thing that we can say for sure
is that any Behavior any substance that
stimulates a lot of dopamine and that is
easily accessed without effort is
potentially
problematic again big increases in
dopamine that are not preceded by effort
are potentially problematic let's think
about methamphetamine huge increase in
dopamine was the brain designed to
release dopamine in response to
amphetamine no the brain was designed to
Dole out dopamine give out dopamine at a
level and duration that is commensurate
with the pursuit of some evolutionarily
adaptive goal methamphetamine bypasses
that gives you a huge surge in dopamine
which is why people feel miserable
afterwards they crave more just to get
back to a lower level of dopamine same
can be said of gambling in particular in
people that are very prone to gambling
addiction certainly can be said for food
for certain people that are very prone
to food addiction certainly can be true
for anything but when it comes to
pornography because of the as you
pointed out the ready availability of
pornography in
particular let's just call it intense
pornography or that includes a lot of
different other stimulatory elements
multiple people high you know a lot of
scenarios that um can be accessed on the
internet right certainly not things I'm
suggesting people go look at but that is
potentially problematic because it
raises the threshold of the person
that's viewing this as what is arousing
to the point where pretty soon they need
those hyper stimulatory environments or
stimula in the form of pornography in
order to get aroused and again none of
that translates into the ability to have
conversation with Partners or the
ability to you know have discussion in
real world circumstances and of course
everything we're talking about could
also be translated to real world
circumstances but the data really point
to the fact that younger people in
particular are consuming more
pornography so we're talking about
bigger dopamine increases with less when
I say effort what I mean is kind of the
the more traditional thing was at least
when I was growing up was you'd go out
on a date or you'd meet somebody and
You' you know there's a series of events
that would happen prior to a physical
interactions right so this is
potentially serious and problematic
there 's a lot of judgment and
understandably so because people arrive
to this sort of discussion with a lot of
different backgrounds in terms of
religious backgrounds and what they
think is okay or not okay what I can
tell you for sure is that I hear from a
lot of young males about their
challenges with porn addiction and they
want to know how to get over porn
addiction and the answer there is
difficult but very simple which is
abstinence it's abstinence it's taking a
period of abstinence from pornography
maybe forever maybe reducing the amount
this is where it gets very tricky very
subjective and it's almost impossible to
kind of have the discussion without
getting into some murky territory yeah
um but it's a real issue and I know it's
a real issue because I hear from
thousands over the last few years of the
podcast I've heard from thousands of
males that are like they were addicted
to porn how do they
feel it sounds to me as if they feel
very dejected and some of them actually
have said they felt very um kind of
misled like almost like this thing this
natural stimulus for them was dangled in
front of them and they just gravitated
towards it the same way that any
biological organism would gravitate
towards something that was triggering
its dopamine system and now they feel
depleted and kind of stuck and they
don't know what to do and I don't
necessarily think I'm the person to
remedy all of this I certainly am not
but I think there needs to be a
conversation much in the same way that
Jonathan height has done an amazing job
with anxious generation of talking about
some of the severe detriment to overuse
of social media and social dynamics on
social media in particular in young
girls and how we're now finally
realizing that we're in a mental health
crisis at least in part because of some
of that and we need to pay attention to
it I think there needs to be a
discussion around pornography and some
of the challenges it can potentially
present in particular for young males
which is not to say that girls and women
aren't also looking pornography because
we know they are the data tell us that
but it does seem to be more of a problem
that's being vocalized by young males
and this of course dovet tales with the
whole discussion about dating behavior
and how that's changed and dating apps
and you know how the ready availability
of kind of the possibility or
anticipation of a partner is there but
actual dating behavior and real world
sexual behavior is reduced I mean
there's a lot that needs to be discussed
and you know ideally we would have a
psych iatrist a
psychologist and um a kind of panel of
experts to talk about this and maybe we
do this together you know as a service
to the world because I hear about this a
lot you for instance just by way of
contrast I'm not getting a ton of
YouTube comments and emails from people
saying hey you know I really struggle
with uh you know with ribeye steak
addiction or with coffee addiction or
energy drink addiction maybe a little
bit with energy drinks but it's not
crashing lives it's not causing people
to feel depressed miserable about
themselves it's not causing people to
have sex ual dysfunction issues and real
world interactions I mean this is also
the concern right that young people are
getting so attuned to certain dopamine
Dynamics related to pornography that
they don't either get aroused or know
how to handle real world intimate
interactions erectile dysfunction all
those kinds of things for instance I do
I have to be honest and this I just have
to be honest because nothing else is
useful but I remember the first time I
saw a pornographic image when I was
young and it was just just a picture of
like someone with like a nipple out and
it was the most arousing thing in the
world and obviously as I've aged I'm now
31 it would take a lot for me to see for
me to feel aroused I certainly wouldn't
get aroused at seeing like the thing
that aroused me when I was 16 or
whatever that I found for example and it
that as you were saying I was thinking
gosh even my arousal cycle as I've
gotten you know over the last 10 years
has changed because of the availability
of pornography but also just sex as a in
real life has
is become more Extreme as it tries to
keep up with the expectations that
pornography sets and then I thought
about a lot what you said about people
messaging you thousands of them about
pornography and the unfortunate thing
about the the abstinence advice is it
leaves them with many of them with What
alternative I mean one would hope um
depending on you know the circumstances
that they would seek out healthy
relationships and then this goes to the
social elements you described which is
it's really difficult and we I've had
multiple people sit here saying to me
that it's really the top 10% of men
that're having most of the sex and this
bottom percent 50% of men haven't had
sex for a year I go so you're you're
going to we got to tell a 19-year-old
horny young man that he's got to abstain
from masturbation and pornography and we
might not be able to offer him an
alternative for a year well I'm not
telling anyone it's not you but I'm
right or maybe um throt throttle back
throttle back his behavior or think
about ways in which things he could do
could lead to healthy romantic and
sexual interactions you know assuming
that you know he's of an age and you
know the circumstances are are like for
that I think that it's you know as you
can tell as I'm kind of stumbling here
I'm not trying to be careful I'm trying
to be as accurate as possible while also
not stating things that I don't believe
are true like you know can pornography
be consumed by certain people in a
healthy way well probably yes um do a
lot of people get carried away with it
and it starts to become a detriment in
their lives maybe even an addiction
maybe even impede other aspects of
romantic and workplace Behavior yes we
hear this all the time do you know where
I am now I at I'm arriving at the
position that I think pornography is
bad because you know again I get lots of
DMS and messages and The more I've
understood about the brain and the body
and the and dopamine Etc I just can't
find a net positive pornography I can't
find one especially as it relates to my
relationship with my partner I've been
with her for 5 years now and I do I
think that me watching pornography
especially if I'm watching it frequently
it's going to help my performance in the
bedroom absolutely not absolutely not
yeah it's sort of um what's that old
saying you want to get good at push-ups
do push-ups you know exactly probably
the best place to get um good at
intimate conversation and behavior is in
the context of like you said like a a
great relationship
um with great communication that sort of
thing
I I do hear about this concern from
people a lot I think that it's hard to
imagine more benefits than kind of
concerns or risks when it comes to
pornography especially for young males I
too grew up in an era where you know
someone would have knowledge of like a
Playboy magazine or something typically
it was stashed someplace in town and
then people would go visit it you know
um it it was like a library or it was it
was sort of a like an urban Library type
environment where you know people would
know oh yeah behind the it was always
like a dumpster or something terrible be
like behind the dumpster behind this
building like there's a there's a stack
of playboys and like then people would
go there right um but it wasn't a big
part of my childhood it wasn't a big
part of my life you know I never found
any pornography in my home like you know
some kids will stumble across their
dad's magazine so I never had that
experience um I think that a lot can be
said about the requirements and
importance of creating healthy dating
behavior and that's a real world
experience kind of thing and you know
this is a bigger discussion that
deserves a lot of time um I'm not sure
we have time for it now but you know
we're growing up in a world where so
much of the input arrives through the
internet again a low effort threshold
High dopamine scenario right some
somebody wants to find something on the
Internet they just Google for it they
can find it um you know I think you want
particular food that's extremely tasty
you can order it to your door um this is
not potentially problematic this is
problematic what it requires ultimately
however I believe is self-regulatory
mechanisms there is no way that
legislature is going to prevent us from
having access to things it's it's just
not because people have always found a
way you know I mean you think about um
prescription drugs that deliver dopamine
without much effort you know even if
people don't have a prescription I think
the data are something like 80% of
college students have taken prescription
stimulants without a prescription I mean
when I went to college nobody did that
nobody we drank coffee occasionally
someone would take a no doze like a
caffeine pill or something and that was
considered extreme and I still don't
recommend it now you know there's all
this consumption of pharmacology there
consumption of porn and I think that
successful individuals will learn and
understand this relationship about
dopamine especially their own and they
will learn to regulate and they will be
very careful about anything that spikes
dopamine really high without much
preceding effort and that has the
capacity for addiction so I worry far
less about the energy drink the loud
music and the workout far far less maybe
not at all than I do high-intensity
pornography consumed on a regular basis
people taking prescription stimulants
who don't need them I mean that's a
recipe for Burnout depression or Worse
how does this kind of dovetail into
having meaning in your life because I'm
thinking now about those young men and
in that sort of stereotype they're maybe
sat in their bedroom alone probably
don't have a romantic partner maybe
don't have a lot to be aiming at in
their lives and the group of people that
fall into those gambling addiction
behaviors or that pornography Behavior
often times not always but often are
also lacking in some kind of meaning is
there like a correlation between the two
are they
Associated um and does one help the
other if I if I go out and start
pursuing some great goal in my life
start a company am I less likely to then
be engaging in the DOP mean inducing
pornography addiction so to answer the
second question first I absolutely
believe that when we are in pursuit of
healthy goals meaning goals that are
building our life forward that are going
to improve our social relationships sure
your income although you know it's risky
to just be in pursuit of money right
there the another great way to
encapsulate the dopamine conversation is
I think it's in that movie Wall Street
where the guy says what's your number
you know how much money do you want he
just says more well that's dopamine
that's the essence of dopam mean he just
wants more it's not really about a
number it's about the pursuit and
acquisition of money for him it's the
verb of acquisition it's not having that
money and you see this and people that
get a million dollars they want 10 they
get 10 they want a 100 they get 100 they
want to be a billionaire right and I can
tell you knowing many billionaires that
some of them are happy and some of them
are intensely unhappy people it really
depends on how well they've managed
their relationship to dopamine because
ultimately it's not about money right
dopamine is just a currency so healthy
relationships are absolutely fundamental
here's what we know many many people are
struggling nowadays from what we hear of
as the isolation crisis but all it takes
is one trusting reliable relationship to
start to shift that in the right
direction I you know I am so adamant
about this one of the most powerful
things that anyone can do believe it or
not is to have someone each morning that
they text good morning to I know this is
going to sound trivial corny and I'm
happy to take the heat on this one find
a a friend and in particular men who
lack friends completely because there's
a greater percentage of those although
it's certainly the case that many young
women and women are um lonely as well
find someone who you can communicate
with each morning just a good morning
text seriously this is one of the most
powerful things you can do to check in
with another member of your species each
morning you don't have to have
conversation you don't have to talk
about what you're going to do each day
knowing that someone else out there in
the world cares about us each morning
when we wake up makes us feel
incredibly part of the
tribe I do this with let's see
one two two friends religiously one from
time to time and a few others kind of
kind fall in and out of the mix it's an
extremely powerful thing to do you're
part of a community can I ask there are
you does it matter what you say because
in my group chats we we tend to tell
each other to off and stuff and we
we roast each other that's fine too even
better if it's elaborated with how do
you sleep what are you doing today
what's your plan for the day and you
reach back is it about showing concern
and care for them and having that
reciprocated or is it just about the
communication itself someone cares
enough to think about you first thing in
the morning you know people are really
isolated we move away from our families
now and by the way these could be family
members that you're communicating with
but the idea that someone is thinking of
us first thing in the morning even if
it's just like a operational thing like
okay here we go good morning the idea
that there's some regularity some
expectation and understanding of a
social connection that's reliable is
immensely powerful you know we've heard
a lot even from the US Surgeon General
about the isolation crisis and the need
for more connection and certainly that
can and should be in the form of walks
with people coffee meals Etc yes yes and
yes but a great starting place that's
very low bar is just a good morning
exchange even by text phone would be
better each morning I do this as an
adult with two friends good morning good
morning if I don't hear from either one
of them by noon I start to worry a
little bit not because they're in any
kind of trouble
but it's just become such a routine part
of my day it allows you to feel part of
something bigger than yourself we are
not meant to live our lives in complete
isolation in complete relationship only
with our goals it has to be in relation
to other people and our goals this is
the importance of going to the workplace
this is the importance of having a place
where you work if you don't have a place
of work going to a cafe or a library
seeing faces in the morning now some
people don't want want to see any faces
in the morning they're not ready to
quote unquote face the day that's fine
but at some point seeing other people
for some period of time even just
briefly on the street saying hello
vitally important you know we evolved we
we are a primate species we are Old
World primates we evolved to look other
people in the eye and for them to look
back at us even if just to say hi as
they walk their dog now some people
don't have anyone it's really sad but
some people don't have anyone to even
exchange this basic text with in that
case I highly recommend that you adopt
an animal a dog can accomplish a
tremendous amount not everything but a
tremendous amount in terms of making us
feel connected we are then a caretaker
they're taking care of us there's
empathy there there's all sorts of
wonderful things if you can't have that
you can get a fish seriously some being
a plant some living being that we're
responsible for and that relies on us
and to some extent that we rely on as
well is so crucial we have huge amounts
of neural real estate devoted to this
humans especially you know most of the
brain is designed for visual processing
for movement and then you start to look
at okay like what's kind of the third
element well it's language and social
connection so find someone that you can
exchange a morning text with on a
consistent basis ideally every day has
this come naturally to you because you
don't strike me as an individual that
this comes naturally to I'm not also
okay you mean I'm I'm a bit of a a loner
is that the sense I a loner I I would be
perfectly okay and there was a year of
my life where I feel like I didn't
interact with anyone when I was building
my first business in a small room in a
rough area of the UK but I'm someone who
if left to my own devices probably
wouldn't interact with anybody and but
you strike me as the same I have my dog
as well but yeah a bit I don't have a
dog right now I'm getting another one
soon I must say I can spend long periods
of time alone but I crave social
connection and more so as I get older
you know I think um most of the
challenges in my life have been around
trying to resolve the need to get work
done that I'm really passionate
about and the let's just call it what it
is the isolation required for that the
discipline the organization that's
required for that and the desire to to
be socially connected now I've been very
fortunate to have a lot of really close
friends and I'm in communication with
them on a regular basis and I've been
closer to some than others there's some
that I'm really close with I talk to all
the time every day I'm close with my
sister I talk to my parents a fair
amount you know more than some less than
others depends on the family structure
um and a few friends are just absolutely
Central to my life and well-being I
think when you have a romantic partner
that you live with or that you're in
communication with then becomes more
frequent but even there you know I think
it's important to still maintain healthy
friendships and of course people differ
on this spectrum I don't think you need
a lot of friends I think you need one
really reliable good friend or more
depending on you know what your needs
are and I think that
as I've gotten older I realized that you
know the the best things in life success
in particular but also hard times are
best shared with other people and the
best way to make friends really is
twofold you know a friend of mine once
said this he said you know people with
interests are interesting so people so
if you're interested in things you know
going and interacting with those things
even if they're within books Etc have
interests genuine interests don't just
learn things for learning sake but just
have interests and then the other is
that if you are not the sort of person
for whom like friendships are just
pouring over you and people want your
time then be of service you know this
notion of be the person who sends the
good morning text now if somebody never
reciprocates well then okay maybe you
look elsewhere and and send your your
energy elsewhere but be the person who
checks up on somebody on a family member
or friend on a regular basis be the
person of service and um you can
volunteer you can help people in any
number of ways I mean the great thing
about a dog or just taking walks is that
you you'll find if you do it continually
in the same neighborhood over and over
you start to run into the same people
and it becomes a hello maybe they become
a friend maybe it's just the familiarity
maybe it's the Barista that you say
hello to each morning you know these
things are really what I think we
evolved in fact I know we evolv to do
and they trigger activation of these
circuits that are so fundamental to our
sense of of well-being and safety it it
largely has to do with with our ability
to predict the future I mean right now
we're in a political landscape and a you
know just a world landscape that's so
uncertain and so divisive you know just
having some things that are just good
let's just call it what it is goodness
just good natured humans being
good-natured you know being kind to one
another and not in any kind of
manipulative way just really being kind
to one another and then upon that one
can layer you know a couple extra hours
of work where you're highly motiv at
than getting back out take your you know
your lunch outside and maybe you don't
see anybody you know people who are
isolated probably have to do more work
to interact with other people but there
are ways to do this and you know for
people that struggle with addictions
like the pornography addictions or
alcohol drug addictions and other like
behavioral addictions I mean there are
zero cost programs essentially in every
city around the world that people can
access some of the social connection and
support for those that again are
completely zero cost for people that um
are interested in exercise you know
there's usually like running groups
there's usually a threshold one has to
get over I'm not one to join a running
group or work out with other people this
is not my kind of thing but I do require
I found um I need healthy social
connection when did you figure that out
because there was an age I can tell
exactly when I figured it out so I know
there must be one for you where you kind
of figure it out yeah I mean I grew up
in a big pack of boys at the end of my
street growing up uh we all played
together then skateboarding in that
world I was just really surrounded by
people all the time when I got serious
about school and research there were a
lot of days and nights I was alone and
at that time I'd listen to books or I'd
listen to music um I still had friends
but I was less social and I think it
wasn't really until my mid-30s that that
I started to realize like whoa like okay
even though you know I had a girlfriend
I was I was lonely and I was starting to
accumulate some unhealthy patterns of
behavior where I was just seeking
Connection in unhealthy ways and as I've
built up my friendship group and that
also of course requires being a good
friend and I suppose there are a few
people out there that probably say that
I'm an unreliable friend but I think if
you were to pull my 10 or 15 closest
friends they'll tell you I'm the guy
that checks in now I probably upset a
few people because I don't check in on
everybody but it's true I've got a list
I actually have a list it's not in this
notebook of about 10 or 15 people it's a
list of 30 people total that those are
my core people people and I make it a
point it's not because I'm regimented or
protocoling any of this I make it a
point to check in on that person I
haven't called that person in a little
while but then there's that Core group
of people that I make sure to check in
with every day at least every week and
that like without whom like I don't
really want to live it's not that I want
to die but life's just so much better
with those people in my life but how
does someone make that list that 15
names you have it's all feel it's the
people that I accept and that accept
accept me you know my patterns of
communication are a little weird it's
gotten me into trouble in life for sure
I'll be you know a good friend of mine
once said you know that I'm like the
little um orbiting uh flying robot in
Star Wars I'm like there and then I'm
gone and people that know me and by the
way he's a very close friend know that
I'm gone but I but I'm back and so I
tend to give things my full attention
I'm like 10 out of 10 attention and then
I need my space to reset and that hasn't
always been healthy but I've done my
best to try and get better at it over
time and people that make that list are
either the same way a few a few of them
are definitely the same way where I'm
like I haven't heard from them in a
while but then when I sit down with them
or we have a phone call it's like
they're really there in fact some of
these people will say let's talk
tomorrow let's talk tomorrow and it
never happens and I know they're not
flaky I know that they're doing other
things and then when they're ready and
we get on a call man it's the richest
interaction I've ever had it's so deep
and so rich I'm like I get so much out
of a 10-minute conversation it's like
yes we're an hourong conversation and
then there are friends that I'll hang
out with for a week I'll go visit um go
for a hike with but it's the richness of
the interaction that matters for me not
the frequency not the frequency that's
right and then for me I think people who
consider me a good friend or people who
understand the intensity that I bring to
things and you know the love and care
that I really have have for them and
that if they need me I'm there like I
will tell you I've had some hard times
some recently and it was amazing I had
people descending on my home to be with
me you I'll tear up if I talk about it
some of them are names people are
familiar with in the in the podcast
space and I was like oh my goodness like
I like I've not had that you know I will
get uh emotional you know they came to
my home and they sat with me
and yeah they picked me up and they
reminded me who I am and
um you know I I've just such immense
gratitude for that um you know I'm a 49y
old man um I've done some things
correctly I've done some things I
regret um I've strived to be the best
person I could be at the time doing the
best I had with what I had and they know
that and I know they know that not just
because they told me but like you can
feel it and I've been blessed enough not
just to know these people but also that
when they've been in need that I've had
the opportunity to go to them you know
and I had to do that several times
recently things that had nothing to do
with me you just sometimes people will
outright ask for help sometimes they'll
say they're in danger sometimes you just
sense it and it's like that's it I'm
driving you know um getting in the car
and um and I've learned the best thing
the way you build that kind of
friendship and network is by showing up
when that hard stuff isn't happening and
you try and give your full attention and
sometimes that requires putting away the
phone and sometimes it means you're both
on your phones and you're just hanging
out and you're watching a game or you
know it doesn't mean being like forcing
yourself to be somebody you're not but
it means paying attention and
um yeah and giving giving a significant
portion of our elves to try and really
like be there for people because
ultimately I think that's what we want
in social interactions you know we want
listening we want shared experience we
want all that stuff and that stuff's
great but ultimately it's like when you
ask who makes the list it's like I'm
thinking of these people now it's like I
feel like they're always with me you
know and
um I wouldn't trade any amount of money
any amount of anything for that and I
think that like a really good life
includes some of that so you know
forgive me for being emotional um or
don't it doesn't really matter to me I
just feel like uh that's the real stuff
that makes life really worth living and
it has nothing to do you know uh with
dopamine or U maybe it does or it
doesn't matter what the mechanisms are
what matters is that we all have that
capacity and it starts by just showing
up on a regular basis showing somebody
that you can care about them enough to
think about them each morning and and
send them a quick good morning text
that's it and if they don't reply okay
and if they do okay and once the
reciprocation starts and you start to
feel of cruded up just a little bit
you're like oh wow like there's
something I can rely on in this crazy
dizzying sometimes
exhausting real hard
life and then when the good stuff
happens you got that many more people to
celebrate with and that much more
intensely so yeah appreciate you letting
me share that it's um it's something
that uh at this stage of life I'm like
okay like I know a few things there's a
lot I still have to learn but that one's
for sure you friendship
is it's vital
you went through a bit of a bit of a
storm this year to say the least and
I've been through many a storm in my
life I've been through many a media
storm when the media came for me and
wrote things about me and I've and I
don't think anyone that's not been
through that before understands how it
feels because for me when it happens to
me there's this real sense of Injustice
and there's this desire for me to want
to jump out and correct things and
scream and shout and correct the world
but I also know that I can't and I when
I saw again I didn't see anything but
I'm from a far looking at you know
social media when I saw you going
through a similar thing my two things
happened the thing one was I wanted to
understand the protocols of a man who
writes about protocols has a book coming
out about protocols I wanted to
understand what he does in that
situation and if he's any more immune
than I am because I'm certainly fragile
in that regard but then also I saw this
other wonderful thing which I think
you've expressed there is I saw your
friends show up I I saw them speak out
about your character and who you
actually are and I saw them
literally show up at your location I saw
someone like Lex Freedman show up for
you it showed up at my home several
times he he was just there like
literally one day I just like look up
and Lex is in the room it's kind of like
a dream right like Le like Lex Freedman
with the suit and the whole thing and um
he was just there to just be there you
know um yeah that was a challenge um you
know as you pointed out the hardest
thing about that and I I realized like
most people who aren't public
facing um won't experience this but I
think everybody experiences something
similar at some point in their life
especially now with social media where
things that are being said about you are
just fundamentally not
true fundamentally not true and they're
being cast in a way in a context that is
just
wrong and you want to say no that's not
how it was or the context is completely
wrong or there's a completely other side
of the story that you'd love to tell but
either because of how that will land and
how people misperceive or contort that
or simply because you have the etiquette
and the respect to not do that because
there are sometimes many different
parties
involved
um you
refrain and in our case I decided to
just mainly focus on the work at hand
although I've talked a bit about this on
Joo willings podcast be talk about it
here the pain comes from being
potentially
misunderstood and also from the
understanding that we didn't always
necessarily do everything right in fact
we may have made some mistakes and the
understanding that the public forum is
not the place to work out the details of
that that's not how healing comes
despite what people might believe that
is not how healing comes and I don't
care if it's a high school situation or
a podcaster or a celebrity or a
politician that is just not the way that
humans effectively settle their
differences there are consequences but
it's not how things really get settled
and I think we have proof of that given
the last few years so in that case and
I'm not trying to be diplomatic or you
know kind of um slalom through this I
think what I'm trying to do is make it
effective and hopefully useful for
everybody what do you do when you're
hearing and seeing things about you or
others that you affiliate with that you
just fundamentally disagree with well
you have three options you can counter
The Narrative you can say nothing right
or you can agree and here in I think
lies the challenge in being an adult a
real adult in the realest sense of the
word a real adult knows when to say you
know what some of the stuff they're
saying yeah wish I chosen
differently but a real adult also knows
to say but some of the stuff they're
saying no that is not what happened
that's not the context and this is
categorically false now those things
often are interdigitated okay now at the
extremes they're not interdigitated but
oftentimes they're interdigitated and
what people have to realize is that
online in comments in certain forms of
media it's just highly skewed you're
getting just one perspective in the
context of science we'd say this is like
cherry picking data looking at one
particular portion of the graph or
throwing out a bunch of experiments
because the data weren't what you wanted
which in science is like
terrible only second in terms of
terrible to actually making up data
right okay so I think the challenge is
to that to so I know that the challenge
in those circumstances is to do what in
the end I ended up doing which was to
sit down and realize that was the
circumstance I was in
and then to try and make a really good
decision about what to do and that I do
believe is best achieved through having
really good friends really good
co-workers and family members who can be
really clear optics for you when you
don't always have the clearest Optics
meaning they can hear your ideas and you
can spitball what might happen in case a
b or c but it's not about being tactical
it's not about being strategic it's
about remaining true to yourself and in
my
case I just felt that I didn't want to
get into the
details um and at the same time I
acknowledge there's always a learning in
these things you asked whether or not
knowing protocols can help well
certainly sleep was important I managed
to sleep there were some days I slept
less than others people had theories he
looks tired this and that sometimes that
was related to earlier recordings that I
tended to just push too hard anyway um
sometimes it related to you know being
kind of troubled about the circumstances
so I think that one can use
physiological size you can use non-sleep
deep rest and I certainly relied on
those tools and continue to friendship
and social support getting a poll of
opinion from people that you really
trust you don't want to get too many
opinions often you want to get just
enough and just a variety of them that
you can make the best informed decision
I don't really believe believe in
polling a 100 people about a
circumstance and then you know taking a
vote pros and cons that the mind doesn't
work that way so in the end you know I I
voted my conscience and I voted my heart
um by continuing to just put out content
so people could learn about
science-based tools for mental health
physical health and performance I think
as time goes on I may elaborate more on
some of the circumstances but I think in
the end you know people listen to my
podcast because they're interested in
getting better sleep in exercise
protocols and hearing from the best
scientists and clinicians so that they
can better themselves in their own life
and people speculate all sorts of things
it's also interesting to see how we
presume so much not just about public
facing people but about other people in
the comment section you know for
instance on my Instagram
page I have rules it's classroom rules
you can call me names if you want you
can say most things but I sort of treat
it like a classroom what would I
tolerate in the classroom and if people
start attacking each other you're going
to get a warning and if you keep going
I'm going to block you just just because
first of all it's my page right this
whole notion that you're not allowed to
block people is crazy right it's your
web page it's your classroom yeah you
have every right you can say you can do
whatever you want I mean where is the
rule that says that you won't tolerate
or that you need to tolerate whatever
you know people swearing at each other
very different to me than people
swearing so people can swear fine swear
at each other well then I'm going to say
hey hey hey like stop this do it again
you're done at least here go elsewhere
and there's so much presumption we think
we know these people on the internet and
we really don't on the other hand
there's certain people like Lex like you
I'm really delighted in this
conversation like Rick I like to think
like me like I am who I am now you're
not seeing every dimension of my life
but frankly you're not supposed to and I
think there's this inherent desire to
know everything about everybody m um
that we see online in comment sections
and on Instagram and and frankly it's
inappropriate I grew up in an era where
that wasn't right in fact my my father
um once told me he again he's from
Argentina and he said you know there's
this funny thing in the United States
you go into somebody's office and
they've got all these pictures of their
kids facing outward he said you go into
somebody's office in certain parts of
Europe or in South America and their
picture of their family is facing them
so on my dad's desk in his office when I
was a kid he had a picture of me and my
sister and my mom and it faced him
because those are for him he wasn't like
here are my kids here's my wife here's
like my life and I I love that that's
and that's kind of how I was raised you
know you keep certain things Inward and
certain things are outward so I don't
know I I that's the model I was raised
with and I rather like that this notion
that we have to share every aspect of
ourselves on social media is crazy and I
think it's actually detrimental if I was
if I was a fly on the wall when you were
going through that what would I have
seen
and I what cuz I'm want to trying the
reason I'm asking this question is super
clear because if you were a fly on the
wall when I was going through some of my
hardest times you would have seen
someone that was really
struggling okay so I'll say
this that was definitely not my hardest
time um hardest times for me
were the door's locked I'm
14 I'm like behind locked doors I don't
know if I'm going to get out when I'm
going to get out you know I called the
one person I knew would pick up guy
named Steve rugie shugi who's my team
manager for Thunder and spitfire wheels
I called him I said shugie what what am
I going to do I'm locked up in this
place and his response was bro you're
the most normal guy I know what am I
supposed to do you know I thought oh my
goodness what am I gonna do um yeah that
was scary that was like what do I do I'm
14 I have no agency I I don't I don't
mean like marketing agency I had no
ability like no money no anything no it
worked out other hard times that time I
talked about July 4th after that fight
what am I going to do with my life I'm a
complete loser other times you know I've
had this weird Karma with mentors I've
had three amazing scientific mentors and
the relationship between mentors and
science mentor and students in science
used to be much closer you'd get really
close my undergraduate adviser was an
amazing person my graduate adviser was
like a mother to me was a truly amazing
individual ual and my postto adviser
also incredible and I was incredibly
close with all of them and it was
suicide cancer and dead at 50 cancer and
dead early 60s like three people I was
super close with and when Ben the third
guy died I thought well there's only one
common denominator that's me I thought I
was cursed really yeah I'm like I work
for you you die you know and I was like
like what is going on here but then
I did what I only know how to do which
is you trans mute the pain into useful
things and I started thinking okay how
do I want to spend the rest of my life I
want to be of service I want to take
what I know in science I want to teach
people things that help them and I
didn't know exactly how I was going to
do that but it birthed the podcast I
also had three dead mentors I was a
scientific orphan in science there's
also a lot of trying to live up to the
reputation that they expect of you well
mine are all dead so some people say
what do your colleagues think of the
podcast I would say about a third of
them like it they think it's cool and
they say that to me about a third
probably think it's great that people
pay attention to science but are like
some of it is more Health oriented and a
third probably hate it for whatever
reason either jealousy or they don't
like the way I present things and I'm
good with all of that because guess what
my advisers are dead I'm a grown-up you
do you I'll do me we're all good and
frankly we'll see how it all works out
meaning they're the ones who have to
live with themselves I'm the one who has
to live with me so like I'm not
responsible for other people's feelings
and they're not responsible for me so so
cool so it's
symbiotic what I eventually discovered
was huh you can reach 40 and have a
great career I was tenured at Stamford
and had a bunch of things but wow like
certain aspects of my life were still
challenging I had you know those three
deaths plus you know um this was some
years ago unrelated to the recent events
I you know had a really important
relationship and just like end after a
lot of years of really slogging it out
and trying to make it work and you know
failure is not something I'm used to in
fact a friend of this woman um I was at
a at a retreat and we were talking about
it and I was really distraught about the
end of the relationship and she said
you're not used to failing are you and I
almost said like yeah and I said you're
right you're right i' I've been
successful in career and and a Rel a
relationship that I we were both really
invested in and we just didn't have the
skills I made my mistake she made hers
but we really really fought hard and it
didn't work out and I was like wow like
okay I had a failure like a legitimate
failure and you could say well was it
really a failure you learn but look
there were elements of failure right we
had invested a lot of years lot of
energy and there was a lot of love but
why why does that make you emotional I
can see it in your face it's um well
this relates to a lot of these things um
and I I suppose I I feel comfortable
enough to open up about this I think
that you know some people might have the
perception that I'm like extremely
self-interested I've had things thrown
at me like he's a narcissist or what or
worse you know like I have had one I've
had many but I have one particular major
challenge that I still strive to
overcome and people can roll their eyes
and they can say it's but I
know this to be absolutely true which is
that I have a very hard time letting go
a very hard time letting go if somebody
dies like I can handle that but like
loss and letting go of people I care
about is really hard and it's also
coupled with this kind of style that I
have of I'm like very present and then I
need to go take care of myself right um
in healthy ways so that can be confusing
to people I realize that but there's
this thing where like the idea of things
ending is super hard and as a
consequence I've stayed in
relationships far too long I mean you
know I sometimes joke but it's not funny
it might break up protocol sucks and it
really needs work because everyone close
to me who knows me really well and who I
trust says you stay in relationships way
too long that were either faded to fail
or that we're clearly going to fail at
some point you just kept slogging away
now sometimes I slogged away in the
wrong ways and they did too but somehow
I've um I've really struggled to move on
from things and as a consequence I've
stayed in things far too long that never
had a chance that were really unhealthy
and in particular I've taken on things
that were just far too difficult from
the beginning and so that relationship
was a beautiful relationship I'm
fortunate that I'm still friends with
that person although we have to keep a
certain amount of distance just at
healthy
boundaries and you know I get emotional
because like damn it like we fought so
hard like so hard and it was all out of
love but I think it I know that it
failed
because we just didn't have the skills
the timing wasn't right and I'm
certainly not talking about this most
recent relationship you know this year
is hard stuff this was some years back
but like we fought so hard and like I
would have done anything and she would
have done anything to make it work and
I'm just like I'm not a quitter I'm far
from perfect believe me but I'm not a
quitter and as a consequence I think
after that
it for a while it just really changed
the way that I interacted with things I
I just didn't quite recover and one
could argue that the emotion that's
coming up for me now means that I didn't
recover but I know I just I
just refuse to call time of death I just
refuse to call time of death even when
it's long since dead and that's a
mistake and it's something I'm really
working on now because it hurt me it
it's not good for other people and it
dovetails with a bunch of other
unhealthy ways of being um but what I
know for sure is that it's not
selfishness it's not that I'm trying to
avoid pain for myself it's related to my
failure to be able
to
just tolerate pain in other people and
myself simultaneously there's something
about empathy gone wrong in those
circumstances does that link to your
childhood parents the parental
separation and them yeah so people I pay
a lot of to tell me that it no doubt
does but what's weird is I never lament
the separation of my parents I don't sit
back and go I wish they had stayed
together they were both wonderful people
they both have wonderful Partners like
I've had a magnificent life I've had a
great life like everything I've sought
to do has happened and there's still
things I want but I think that um I was
talking to Martha Beck about this
recently there's this feeling with a dog
where I love the dog and they love you
back particular my dog Costello right I
loved him and he loves me back and so
it's like empathy but then you it's
returned it's like a perfect circle it's
like the energy is like the more I love
the more love I feel the more love and I
think with people it's not like that
right you know people are going to
disappoint us Etc but they can also
Delight us but I think that there's been
this problem where my empathy goes too
far and I'm sure as I'm saying this
people are like oh God he's trying to
mask this and empathy no I can
wholeheartedly say didn't always lead to
the best choices and I own those choices
but meaning I'll take responsibility for
my part I won't take responsibility for
other people's part right it's always a
two-way street but when
we have a sense of empathy and that
other person isn't right for us and we
continue to try and like feed the
relationship it's not about trying to
avoid getting them upset but somehow we
get into these unhealthy Dynamics and
then you know it can really bring out
the worst but some really like unhealthy
parts of people you know I think
probably the hardest thing in life is is
romantic relationships some people might
say it's work but I think it's the
hardest thing in life and people say
Well when it's right it's easy I don't
know I think it depends on how
complicated a person you are you know um
I think it depends on how complicated a
person you are and the extent to which
the other person is willing to do the
work I've really seen this I've also had
wonderful
relationships whereby we're each willing
to do the work on selfcare and
communication you know Paul Ki said this
not on my podcast but I think he was
telling Whitney Cummings on a podcast
you know if you were to list out the
hundred most important things in
romantic relationship you would just say
self-care and communication 50 times and
I think that's absolutely true because
we need safety we need acceptance yes
those are foundational non-negotiables
necessary but not sufficient but I think
we need communication and self-care and
those are hard and you know I'm still
learning you trying to build those
skills I absolutely want a family so
this is super important to me um and I'm
putting a ton of work and effort into it
so I didn't realize we were going to go
into this territory but I will say for
people who are struggling with
relationships just know that you know
you can have amazing friendships and
still struggle with romantic
relationships or vice versa again like
friendships and I have male friends and
female friends mostly male friends but a
few female friends um that I'm very
close with like it's
just been amazing I'm have a great
relationship with my sister I think I
have a very good relationship with my
parents with my uncles and aunts like
like with my co-workers my ability to
pick business partners and co-workers
just I only hit Bull's eyes like I love
my team and we get along great and
little things get worked out quickly and
um but I think everyone has one or two
areas of life where it's a bit harder
and just try and learn the skills and
I'm working on it like I like you and me
both though I I it didn't come naturally
to me my parents although they never
separated I was willing them to because
I was they they were just they hate
Hate's a strong word it appeared that
they hated each other you know watching
my mother scream at my my father for
seven hours a day every my mother's
Nigerian my dad's English was it was a
traumatic experience and the thing it
left me with is this clear notion which
I left the household with at 18 was that
a relationship is prison and I was it
was so hard wide into me cuz I thought
my father was in prison and so every
time someone was interested in me
growing up I would self reject I would
reject them so I'd pursue them and then
when they turned to me and said okay
let's be in a relationship I would
persuade them out of it I would tell
them why this was a terrible idea
because I was getting the feeling that I
vicariously learned through my father I
was I'm about to basically lock myself
in a prison where this person's going to
SC going to be able to control me in my
freedom so I rejected relationships up
until about 27 years old so you know and
then even that relationship wasn't a
straight line because two years in she
turns around and say she doesn't like
having sex with me turns out she's got
her own traumas around sex so we have a
year where she's on the other side of
the planet I didn't have the tools as
you say to understand what how to
navigate such a conversation so for me
I'm emasculated I'm going maybe there's
something wrong with me she doesn't want
to have sex with me dump her and then
but she was the right person and what
the the tldr of that story is a year
later I end up flying to the other side
of the world apologizing to this person
for my lack of tools my lack of
communications skills cuz it was the
right person at the wrong time and we
did the work and that was long and it
was hard and it's still hard but it's in
an amazing place at the moment oh you're
back together yeah we live together
she's flown from back from barley two
years ago we live together the best the
right person for me but it's hard work
good for you you like hard work it's a
wonderful Story I mean it's a happy
story regardless of ultimately how it
turns out because one can sense like the
real uh Central cord of Love there and
um and the the desire to make it work I
mean it's it's so interesting this
notion of make it work you know again
just as being a functional adult means
saying yep you're right about this but
no I'm going to Stand My Ground in
relationships people say relationships
take work of course they do and then the
question is how much work relative to
how much ease and it's highly individual
and there's no handbook for this there's
no handbook for it and and so and the
reward on offer cuz I was convinced that
she was the most amazing person I'd ever
met it just so happened that she turns
around to me one day and says she
doesn't like having sex with me yeah
that's rough that's rough right
especially for a young you have no
concept of what that might be you think
maybe you're bad in bed or something but
as she did the work on herself and I did
the work on myself she unlocked a bunch
of traumas around sex and how she'd been
treated with sex as she grew up what she
she resolved and she's been very public
about this this is why I can share it
and I did a bunch of work on myself and
how to deal with
how I communicate when someone says
brings me such a thing and after a year
of her working on that and a year of me
working on myself we found ourselves in
a place where it turns out she loves sex
now she's arguably even more sexual than
I am in many respects completely
different individual but it just require
and I I have to give the ending there
because people are going to be wondering
but it required a lot of work on me and
myself and where I've come from and the
situation of my my family and her and
the experience she's been through and we
found ourselves together now in a great
place place when that still requires
work but in a great place so you know
everyone's everyone's struggling with
some you know my family's not great
we we're not that close I'm not that
close to certain members of my family
I've struggled with romantic
relationships made all the mistakes I
struggle with with platonic
relationships with my friends I'm not
the guy that's able to check in I like
being alone you know it is what it is
we're
all you know uniquely challenged in some
way so I've got a great amount of
empathy for what you shared and I I
really appreciate you for sharing it
because there's so many people that can
relate in various ways I'm one of them
um and I think it's important because we
don't talk about it enough well thank
you for sharing your experience and for
giving me the opportunity to share a bit
um you know the conversation started
around you know hard circumstances and
you know it's about taking stock of
where we trust ourselves um to make the
right decisions where we need work and
yeah relationships are hard but I do
think that well certainly now I'm
feeling um more ease you know more
seamlessness with them certainly with
friendships as I mentioned you know we
all have these areas of proficiency
where we are you know where we find that
things are kind of easier or even easy
for us they just kind of happen direct
relationship between effort and outcome
right and then these other areas where
we feel like we're rolling a boulder
uphill keeps coming back and crushing us
and we keep doing it and I think that
you know there's no simple or Universal
answer um but you know I think the
rewards that come from a relationship
where there's been a lot of hard work
and things get resolved even in one
little domain yeah are so tremendous you
know I think that's really um related to
this sense that
like when things end it's just so feels
so devastating I I really believe that
things can be talked through I really do
I think that um you know resent and
anger um They don't serve anyone they
really don't and people are probably
hearing this and say well that's a self-
serving narrative but really I'm talking
about it in in myself too I I don't
carry any resent and any any anger you
know I sometimes wish people had made
different choices but ultimately like we
can't control what anyone else is going
to do or say or think and that's
terrifying right people can really hurt
us right they can really hurt us and we
would love to create a world in which
we're completely safe but I think that a
lot of the work I've been doing lately
is really around um you know kind of
like touching back into maybe a a
younger version of myself that um wasn't
so walled up wasn't um so focused on
what's going to happen in two or three
iterations of something just really
being as present as possible really
focusing as it's probably become clear
today a few times I'm like the amazing
gifts that I have in my life right now
that pursuing goals is great and wanting
things is great certainly there are
things I want and want to build mostly
in the domain of relationships and
family but but also just like really
savoring like having one's health or
having um the opportunity to sit down
and have a conversation like this like
like what a what an extraordinary life
we each have if we really pay attention
to some of these gifts I used to think
that if we paid attention to those gifts
and focus too much on gratitude that it
would make us complacent but all the
data of course and my own experience as
I do this more and more really emphasize
how all it does is give us more energy
more anticipation of what's possible and
the great things to come and you know it
can all start to sound a little cliche
like just be happy with what you've got
there there's no just in that statement
I'm saying be happy with the things
you've got and from that state new
things emerge more energy comes and you
can start to really navigate forward not
just sit complacently and like stop
there
um I think it's our Essence as
biological beings and psychological
beings and if you will Spiritual Beings
if that's your you're leaning to to want
um to want more I think that's normal
but we have to savor what we have also
and I think once we Savor what we have
we have more energy to want more and and
that's that's the perfect circle that
just is I guess it's more of an upward
spiral and here I'm sounding very
abstract but I could easily and you know
exhaustively put everyone to sleep with
long mechanistic descriptions of how
research on motivation or dopamine or um
any number of different neural systems
or physiological Systems Support all of
that I think the most important thing is
that people are honest with themselves
about what they can reasonably work on
right now and to be you know gentle with
themselves enough to like coax
themselves forward but occasionally
Scruff yourself and be like it's time
you know it's time and um I don't know
it's certainly been an interesting life
th far I'm still navigating you know and
um I certainly don't have all the
answers but as I learn I try and share
what I do learn what has helped you on
that Journey that journey to really kind
of because the way I heard it is you're
someone that's orientated towards
pursuing your goals and you're very very
driven in that regard but you're you're
kind of having to kind of maybe this is
not the right word but kind of unlearn a
natural disposition and shift more
towards another state you talked about
therapy there you um what has helped
well I think you know I was forced into
therapy as a way to get out of lockup I
had to to stay in high school I had to
go routinely and so I did um I think it
can be very helpful provided there's
good rapport support and the person
offers Insight that lends itself to
action right it's not just about finding
someone to support and listen someone
has to inspire action that makes you a
better person okay that and that's
really important so not just talking
about playing with your problems you
know story fondling as it's sometimes
called I think one has to understand
that there's a relationship between
physiology and emotion so if I'm waking
up and I don't feel well because I
didn't sleep enough yeah I'll do nsdr
I'll get some sunlight and I'll go
exercise and generally I feel better but
I also have learned to not Mask real
feelings by simply trying to shift my
physiology just as people are starting
to learn hey yes there are useful
medications for dealing with mental
health issues but you still have to do
the work you still have to focus on
building career building relationships
doing the work
I think one of the most useful things
that I've learned again I'm a big fan of
Martha Beck she's triple degreed from
Harvard but she also has this mystical
spiritual side that it really brings
together a lot I asked her recently I
said you know what do you do when the
thinking mind is like trying to analyze
something predict things and then you
also have all this feeling which one do
you rely on she says Ah the the way to
do this is you
imagine you have your feelings in one
hand and your thoughts in the other and
they're kind of like in this battle it's
like okay what's going to happen next
what are they going to do this how you
go back and forth typically people are
texting and calling and looking and
drinking and doing whatever is to try
and resolve this battle the solution is
to see that battle and to sit back into
this third position that she calls the
compassionate Observer you're like okay
this is both happening these are both
happening and to sit in this third
position where you realize trying to
reconcile just with your thoughts or
just with your emotions or settle down
your emotions or settle down your
thoughts as futile to get in this third
position where the acceptance of that
suffering shows up and you're able to
just like sit with the suffering and the
moment she said sit with the suffering I
was like no you know I don't want that
answer but then she explained from that
place of suffering you start to drop
into what are the thoughts that make you
feel a little bit looser and more
relaxed in your body what are the
thoughts that make you feel kind of more
constricted and you just start to use
that as a bit of a navigator
and start asking questions like you know
do I want to do this thing like do I
want to drink this coffee or not am I
just doing it compulsively do I want to
exercise and it sounds very abstract
extremely woo but the Brilliance of what
she does and the Brilliance of that
scenario is that it brings together all
the Neuroscience that we know we have a
thinking analytic part of the brain that
does what I call dpos duration path
outcome analysis we also have emotional
states of the brain the lyic system it's
sometimes called but it's a bunch of
other areas too and it doesn't know the
the calendar as Paul kti brilliant
psychiatrist says feelings don't know
that it's today in July 2024 it thinks
you're eight years old that the lyic
system your emotions they don't know the
clock of the calendar it doesn't know
how old you are it just knows you and
circumstances and feeling so being able
to step back from all of that is really
what being a healthy human being is
about and then realizing you're
suffering like in that battle you're
suffering and when you relax that a
little bit and you go okay I'm not going
to force myself to suffer as much now
what feels right what feels right right
now for like the next five minutes well
then you can navigate the next five
minutes maybe it's take a nap maybe it's
have a meal maybe it's do a little bit
of work maybe it's you don't know and
you just sit there but then five minutes
later you're able to pick the next best
choice and the next best choice and
pretty soon you're off and on your way
because so often we get avalanched by
our feelings or our thoughts or we can't
sleep and it's just like a and people
are losing their minds and they're
online looking for a solution or they
use distraction alcohol mindless
scrolling by the way I love social media
I teach on social media and I learn on
social media from your podcast and Joe's
podcast Lex's podcast and Tim's and on
and on so I'm not demonizing it but
mindless consumption
inebriation numbing ourselves or forcing
ourselves to do things that are not in
service to our well-being none of that
is good what's good is being able to sit
with it and in doing that I've started
to realize that you get back to what she
calls and again the language sounds woo
but who cares she's the one with 3D re
from Harvard so call her whatever you
want you
know is the what she calls essential
self which I think refers to our own
unique wiring what really feels right to
us trusting in our own goodness trusting
that if we just navigate forward from
that compassionate Observer place that
we are going to be in some cases we need
to be fierce we need to be warrior in
other cases we need to be soft and
compassionate and then we can be all of
those things depending on what the the
situation calls for and then we can just
like sit back and move forward and that
we're going to be okay in fact we're
going to be better than okay and that
when we bring that stance that like calm
energetic stance to things and other
people we also have a ton to give we can
be in so much service this is one of the
reasons I think people love Rick I think
about Rick a lot Rick Ruben's a close
friend and I'm very blessed and it's not
because he's Rick Rubin the famous
musician in fact I know zero minus one
about hip-hop yeah I just don't it
wasn't a genre I followed I like some of
it but but one thing is that when Rick
shows up he's just like there he's super
present he's not there to give you
anything but he gives and he's not there
to take anything you he's just there and
I think that's why people love him I
think that's why people love him yes
he's been super successful in all these
different domains and when people try
and poke at Rick that's something it
really pisses me off you want to really
get me worked up try and pick on one of
my close friends like I that's a place
where I am like you know come at me
attack me all day and you people do but
if you try and attack people I know in
their true goodness Lex or Rick or any
number of my different friends famous or
not like that's when I'm going to you
know that's when a side of me comes out
that frankly I I'm proud of like I'm GNA
hit hit you and I'm going to hit you
hard I'm going to be fair but like you
can't do that because these are really
good people trying to do the best they
can in the world and this is true me
protecting my sister you know I'll also
be the first if a friend is out of line
to say something but the people I'm
referring to here they show up with like
all their goodness Joe's the same way
and people talk about Joe and I'm
like people have tried to get me to talk
about him reporters have called me
to try and set me up like a trap a snake
air trap to say things about him no
chance he's done things that I've seen
that had nothing to do with me in
service to others that are completely
quiet that no one will ever hear
about that absolutely tell me that he is
a huge hearted person who cares about
the world and takes care of people close
to him and far away from him without the
expectation of anything in return and
I'm not saying this so that he likes me
more I'm saying this because it's true
and I think that you know
Martha Beck's another one or people that
like they just want to give and so when
I see people attacking people and I can
sense us about you we're getting to know
one another here like the fact that you
try to attack someone whose fundamental
goal is to try and serve the world build
things to serve like and there are a few
things that get my adrenaline going like
that but that's not okay it's not okay
and I think it's really important that
we stand up for people who are not known
either we stand up up for them and that
we say that's not okay you can't take
cheap shots like that and so I think
times are changing there times are
changing you know the um I don't have
anything against traditional media I see
the way they capitalize on things
they'll put different names and URLs and
trying and bring clicks and stuff look
they're just trying to make an income um
and I think some of them presumably are
good people just trying to do their
thing what I love about
podcasters what I love about the early
you know the skateboarders I knew from
the skateboard era some I still touch
with now um punk rockers the people in
Creative areas artists and musicians and
Poets is like they didn't get into it
because they thought people would like
them or they'd make a lot of money and a
lot of times they take
ridicule they got into it because it's
who they are it's their Essence they're
just being them and I think we can
really tell when somebody's just being
themselves it's like their real Essence
just brought forward and they're taking
fire and they're taking shrapnel and
they're and they do it anyway you know
I'm I know he's very popular now um even
though he's dead um but I've always
loved Jean Michelle basia's work and if
you watch that movie I don't know if
you've seen the movie Basia not the the
documentary but amazing movie it's got
Dennis Hopper Parker posie um David
Bowie plays um Andy Warhol it's an
amazing cast William defo it's just an
amazing cast and there's this incredible
scene where Jean Michelle and benio Del
Toro who I believe was playing Jean
Michelle's friend who was Vincent Gallow
Jean Michelle says to him he goes hey
Benny how long do you think it takes to
get famous and the answer that bonio Del
Toro gives him is amazing he talks about
how Fame ultimately just brings a lot of
attack and how that can really collapse
the artist and it's it's a beautiful
two-minute Riff on YouTube that everyone
should go watch and if anyone out there
thinks they want to be famous I'll tell
you you do not want to be famous famous
takes away your freedom people say they
want to be famous you absolutely don't
what you want is you want a friend or
friends that you love and that love you
you want to have enough resources plus a
bit more so that you feel safe right
anyone that says you only need $70,000 a
year in order to be happy because some
study said that you need enough
money so that you feel safe about your
present in your future that number
differs for different people okay so
that's a study I don't care what the
data say like look at the real world and
usually it's a rich person saying you
only need that amount of money by the
way you need some sense of passion or
connection to the world and you need a
sense of Freedom that you can be you and
that you won't get attacked for it we
know this throughout history this has
been proven over and over again so Fame
is like frame takes away your
freedom the rest of it social connection
some resources a connection to some
passionate exploration curiosity even if
it's very private and no one ever sees
it like those things are are really what
make life Rich it really really does and
I have fantasies about just disappearing
taking a small group off to some hidden
village and we do our thing but but I
know myself too well I'd want to um I'd
want to connect with the world more it's
just in my nature to want to do that so
I suppose I'm kind of hosed and I
suppose the world's kind of stuck with
me until they
aren't but no I I have those fantasies
as well and I arrive at the same
conclusion that I'd eventually do
something in the village which would
bring me back to society and then bring
me back to probably sitting in this chat
well and you know I've thought about
getting some people together and we
should do this we could get a property
put a bunch of houses put a gym a sauna
could have a podcast St you but guess
what they'd call it a cult they'd be
like they started a cult right they'd
find something be like they started a
cult
because I think to people that are not
passionate creators and again I'm not
just talking about podcasters but that
aren't passionate creators they don't
understand like they don't understand
that certain people just need to create
yeah and God bless them because we need
somebody to write articles from a
perspective that they don't understand
to get other people to think things that
aren't true because that's what they
need to do like they serve an important
role like in the aquarium of life on the
coral reef of life you need the little
like horseshoe crabs working there when
you say like well what's the purpose
it's part of an ecosystem it somehow
indirectly serves the rest although
sometimes it's kind of hard to tell and
as we head into this election as as we
head into like really uncertain times I
think we tend to go the media or the
podcasters or the the look everyone's
doing the best they can with what
they've got it's just some people are
working a little bit harder to be kind
and benevolent and giving and
acknowledging we're all human and others
are like pointing fingers so of all the
protocols you've shared it seems like
maybe the most important is friendship
send that morning text find somebody
that you can communicate with that will
communicate with you that you trust you
don't have to share a ton I don't want
to give the impression that I sit there
with my friends and like share all the
inner workings of my mind and what's
going on you know I mean that's why I
have this notebook so I don't have to do
that it's like I got stuff in here I
never want anyone to see you know
but yeah find a friend like friendship
is huge and and it's the start of all
great things right it it's the
reflection of all great things inside of
us right it's not the complete picture
romantic relationship for many for most
is really important get a dog get a fish
get a plant sure but I think friendship
really is like the most important thing
that all of us can really focus on right
now aside from partnership and children
because of course children need us and
um they need our our attention and our
support but friendship is is super
powerful and rather than talk about the
isolation crisis the loneliness crisis
I'd rather talk about some solutions and
I think friendship maybe even just a
morning text back and forth good morning
good morning how'd you sleep pretty good
not well okay bye next day it's there
that being able to rely on that like
clockwork like the sun rising and
setting each day you can count on that
it's just brings a lot of Peace it'll
make you a better version of yourself do
your friends know what you mean to them
having gone through those difficult
moments did you were you were you able
to articulate to them how much you
appreciated them for
that I'll get emotional again I I don't
I don't think they could know you know
it's it's like there's one friend in
particular um there's a guy who's
actually very prominent in the
skateboarding Community he he's quiet in
that Community I I'll say his name
because he's so humble you know he'll
never say it for himself his name is Jim
Theo and when I was 14 years old Jim who
now runs a big company called Deluxe
which is a bunch of companies and he
he's kind of the he's kind of the mayor
of the whole sport he's um back then I
remember I was 14 this was after I got
out of this place and um he rolled up to
me at Embarcadero and he sat next to me
he just like sat next to me gave me a
coffee and some stickers and he is was
like what's up man and he's probably
about 10 years older than I am and we
started talking and he gave me one of
his books sorry Jim I'm G to embarrass
him he had of these poetry books great
book I still have it a loose change and
he had another one called do the
distance and he
goes you should
write okay and I started writing I
started keeping a journal and that one
interaction carried me through so many
hard times now years later I had a
really hard circumstance things were
going well in my life I was making prog
ress on a certain front that I've been
challenged with with for some time and
then one day
just everything came crashing
down and like magic Jim showed up I'm
not I'm not saying he got a call from
the universe somebody called him and he
showed up and he just sat with me now
I'm an adult at this point he just like
sat with
me and
um and I hear from him every morning you
know and I still text him every morning
texted me today he's here in LA today we
won't see each other so he's busy I'm
busy we got work I would love to see him
but he's busy and I respect that he's
busy and he respects that I'm busy it's
like wow you know 14 and then 40 some
years and he's there again and I like to
think I've been there for him too you
know and you know when I was that kid at
some point he knew in some way he knew
EX exactly what I needed I needed those
books I needed something and you know
even when I tell him now about that he
goes oh no that poetry is so bad you
know he's embarrassed about that and I'm
think no man you like saved my life with
that stuff and I kept them I still have
them and so I think he must have like
sensed that I was a really like feeling
person and I was really in a trench and
we've seen a lot of our friends go dead
or in jail and in trouble we've seen a
lot of people do extremely well Jim's an
amazing guy because he's the one who
calls the decisions on a lot of things
in the kind of social milu of
skateboarding he's taken a lot of I
don't want to get into the details but
he's helped evolve skateboarding in some
ways that it was very resistant to
evolving you can largely credit the true
diversity in that sport you know people
talk about diversity but look at that
sport look at the number of different
races look at the fact that you've got
straight kids gay kids trans kids you've
got room for the kids who have parents
and the parent involvement you've got
kids that don't have any parents you've
got people trying to help each other get
sober and stay sober you've got people
like Jim has taken so much
publicly on the chin
maintaining complete silence about his
rationale except with one mission in
mind which is keep the sport going in
the healthiest way possible that's most
inclusive for the most number of people
because he knows the importance of
having a place where kids that don't fit
in in other sports can come but also the
importance of having it be an Olympic
sport which skateboarders on too
and so this isn't about skateboarding I
want to make very clear it's about JY
and the fact that he understands his
sense of purpose his sense of Duty he
knew well enough that even though he was
a professional skateboarder that he
would better serve the community by
doing something else which is to be a
leader he leads quietly like I think
about him all the time so do they know
how much I appreciate them there's no
way I could go on for hours about him
the things he's done for me anyone that
knows that qu knows Jim knows exactly
what I'm talking about he'll never have
a podcast he'll never go on a podcast
maybe he'll bless us with coming on my
podcast but some people like him like I
hope they but people like him in my life
and I hope they know but there's no card
you can send that can capture all that I
think it's just like checking in on on
him every morning and just you know
giving him a big hug when I see him you
know and um I saw a tweet recently it
was like normalized or no it was the
dude with Sign guy who's super funny I
think it said normalizing telling your
friends you love them I don't think that
was for women hopefully they're doing
that too I think it's for men like I'm
not shy about that I tell my friends I
love you I've also had the experience of
not doing that and I never see that
friend again so I'm not trying to be
overly sentimental right it's really
about just like like living your life
with as much heart forward as is safe
and appropriate
right so anyway um that's one example
there's there's no way they could know
he just sat with me I find this to be
very interesting words because we think
about the role of a friend in that
situation of fixing things diving in
there figuring out the problem and
presenting the solution but you said he
just sat with me oh man when Barbara
Chapman my graduate adviser died I was
devastated and she had two small girls
and I knew her when she was pregnant
with each one of them and I was close
with their family and I went to the
House of Flowers in San Francisco and
her daughter get up okay one I think was
probably about 12 the older one the
younger one who by the way became a
neuroscientist at that time was probably
about nine and these two girls that I've
known since they were essentially in the
womb are there talking about their dead
mother now I broke down I during my
eulogy like I just lost it I was crying
in front of my colleagues I was so
embarrassed and at the same time like I
just couldn't hold it back these two
young girls get up there to talk about
their dead mom and I'm thinking to
myself oh my God everyone's just bracing
themselves and they just said they're so
strong they
said the best part about our mom is that
she spent a lot of unstructured time
with
us and that was it and they sat down and
I remember thinking holy like that
was it of all the things they did the
baseball games they went to the things
they did I'm sure they have so many
memories and the thing they remember is
most important is the fact that their
mom spent a lot of unstructured time
with them just hung out with
them like just hung out with them and I
think at some level like yeah we need
people to show up when things are hard
we need people to support us celebrate
with us but like someone is like a
really good friend is just somebody who
just kind of hangs out with us Simon
syic said that to me he said in those
moments what you need is someone just to
sit in the mud with you you don't need
them to do anything they just need to be
sat there in the mud with you and that
that in part is the medal effect just
knowing that there's someone else in the
mud with you yeah um yeah you know I I
again I don't want to focus on names
people recognize because I don't want it
to seem like it's Unique to them but I I
mention names like specific names
because they may resonate with your
audience you know that's why I mention
Rick or whatever or like a guy like Lane
Norton I'm getting to know better like
laye on social media is a pretty you
know serrated edge guy right but he's
he's a sweetheart he a kind person and
he's got a ferociousness to him you know
which is something I can relate to he
you know and um and I see his loyalty to
his kids and I see you know how he like
his fingernails will be painted and
people will tease him and but he does it
because his daughter loves it and he
also is the guy that's going to deadlift
twice as much as anyone else and he's
and he's got this forward Center of Mass
on things and then I also just see like
he's just such a loving person he loves
what he does and and I hope people will
start to look at people's personas
certainly online but in real life and
just start to like take them in a little
bit like what are they trying to tell
you when they're being a little bit
annoying or what are they trying to tell
you when they're frustrated by politics
like like looking a layer deeper and
trying to like see the person and feel
the person as as an experience of them
is like another way I think to be a
really good friend because when people
say like I see you I don't think they're
like I see you like you need to do some
eye gazing or something I think what it
is I mean eye contact is important of
course but I don't think it's
it's related to like taking them in
visually as much as just like really
appreciating that they have all these
different sides all these different
facets you earlier you were talking
about your relationship I mean what you
describe to me is like real intimacy
like sure things proceed along great
then there's this challenge it's a big
one there's some shame associated with
it there's confusion and then people go
into their different domains do their
work come together and like share and
then grow I mean that's intimacy it
takes risk it takes a certain amount of
healthy risk and um I think we can do
this in all relationships and um you
know I'm no psychologist and I'm still
learning and Lord knows I have a lot of
work to do but um I'll be damned if I'm
gonna quit I'm gonna keep trying Andrew
we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question to the next guest not knowing
who they're going to be leaving it
for and the question left here for you
is what is the true meaning of your life
why do you
exist goodness that's a tough one
meaning it's hard to distill that
down but I'll pause for a second in an
effort to keep it uncharacteristically
brief you know as I mentioned earlier
all I have is my experience the
knowledge that I gain from that
experience and my words
and for me the purpose of my life is to
make the best possible choices that I'm
capable of making at the time in terms
of what to seek out what to
learn and what to share and I think the
real meaning of my life is to try and
provide useful information and tools so
that people can be a better version of
themselves for themselves and other
people and I know sounds lofty and kind
of empty and cliche on the one hand but
I mean it I wake up in the morning and I
think what can I learn what am I excited
to
learn and then when I come across gems I
just compulsively have to tell people
about it but not
because I need to do it for me it's
because I feel like people need to know
about this this can really help this can
really help this can potentially really
really really really help so I think
that's the meaning of life for me right
now right now and um at some point it
may be just to provide care for
little huberman
um um at some point it may be something
entirely different I've learned to not
anticipate what the next steps will be
for me um more than five years out you
know I've seen some ridiculous
speculation that I'm going to go into
politics probably related to the fact
that I kind of alluded to it once or
twice
I'm not going into politics I'll tell
you right now there's no chance I'm
going into
politics it runs countercurrent to my
nature and even if politics changed
entirely it's not for me um what is for
me is learning and adventure and sharing
what I learn and that's the only way I
know how to
be Andrew thank you I did know you
before today I obviously knew of you
because everyone knows you on on the
internet for all the work that you've
done and all the things that you shared
but I didn't know the man and the hours
we've spent together today have really
illuminated the man that you are and
it's really most importantly illuminated
your intentions which are so incredibly
pure and wonderful and it's because of
you that much of my podcast exists
because I learn from your show it
inspires me and that calls me to bring
guests on oftentimes guests that you've
had on your show that I've changed my
life in some way so you've been a
tremendous driver of both my development
as an individual but also of this show
inadvertently and also that's the case
of all of my team because the 30 40
people that work with me here they're
all massive fans of yours but most
importantly they've had their lives
improved because you exist and because
you've taken very complex things and
distilled them down and shared them with
all of us in a way that we wouldn't
usually have access to so that's such a
tremendous gift that you've given and
continue to give so thank you on behalf
of myself and all of my team and
everybody else that was so excited all
my friends that were so excited that I'd
be speaking to you today um I'm
tremendously excited about your book I
hear that there's a book coming out
called protocols uh an operation an
operating manual for the human body
which comes out next year in the 22nd of
April 2025 if there was ever a book I
don't get excited by many books but
having been such a fan of your work it
is a book that I'm I consider to be
essential we were talking about it
yesterday we see it as we're almost like
waiting for the like the Bible on this
subject matter matter so I I'm going to
link it below cuz I know it's currently
available for pre-order pre-sale and I
highly recommend if people find what you
do to be of any value then this is the
book to read um I've been doing
everything I can to just get Snippets of
it from people around you and the
excitement and anticipation is palpable
so thank you for taking the time to
write that book because you don't have
to you've got a big enough audience as
it is you don't have to sit down and
really distill it down for people um and
more than anything just thank you I
really really appreciate that what you
do and that the fact that you exist and
all that you've done for me and and all
my my friends and people that matter to
me so thank you on behalf of all of us
us and I really really mean that from
the bottom of my heart so thank you
thank you I'll take that in and um I'm
very grateful for the opportunity to sit
down with you today I'm a huge fan and
admirer of what you've done and what
you're doing and uh right back at you in
the sense that you have many many areas
of success you don't need to do a
podcast um but the fact that you do
bring so much benefit to the world it's
been just marvelous to see your Ascent
which is just like pointed at the sun
you just you guys are are doing such
incredible work and continue to and um I
have to say I I came here today
expecting we were going to get into some
science and to some protocols and I knew
we were going to cover a lot of areas um
but I didn't anticipate uh the depth of
the conversation that we were going to
have and I can say it's entirely the
consequence of of your realness and and
the uh that you know the genuine
compassion that you bring to these kinds
of conversations that's felt I also
really appreciate the way you shared
some of your own experience
I can tell you're somebody who really
cares about people and that your success
is you know in no small part the
consequence of that so thank you for
having me here and to your team for
having me here and um for for doing what
you do it's clear you're Allin in every
Endeavor and your nature is is an
incredible one the fact that you can
take on so many things and that you've
embraced your nature to uh not want to
go the traditional path I think that's
an incredible and incredibly important
example for people so I can also say
that I think that uh we're going to be
friends so you should pass me your
number we'll we'll check in in the
morning and we should grab a meal or a
workout or whatever maybe just hang out
so I I'd like to think that uh We've uh
sparked a friendship we certainly have
thank you Andrew thank you
[Music]
ah